THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART I
CHAPTER 1 1ST CONVERSATION WITH
JACOB NEEDLEMAN MALIBU CALIFORNIA
26TH MARCH 1971 'THE ROLE OF THE
TEACHER'
Needleman: There is much talk of a spiritual revolution among
young people, particularly here in California. Do you see in this
very mixed phenomenon any hope of a new flowering for modern
civilization, a new possibility of growth?
Krishnamurti: For a new possibility of growth, don't you think,
Sir, that one has to be rather serious, and not merely jump from one
spectacular amusement to another? If one has looked at all the
religions of the world and seen their organized futility, and out of
that perception seen something real and clear, perhaps then there
could be something new in California, or in the world. But as far as
I have seen, I am afraid there is not a quality of seriousness in all
this. I may be mistaken, because I see only these so-called young
people in the distance, among the audience, and occasionally here;
and by their questions, by their laughter, by their applause, they
don't strike me as being very serious, mature, with great intent. I
may be mistaken, naturally.
Needleman: I understand what you are saying. My question
only is: perhaps we can't very well expect young people to be
serious.
Krishnamurti: That is why I don't think it is applicable to the
young people. I don't know why one has made such an
extraordinary thing out of young people, why it has become such

an important thing. In a few years they will be the old people in
their turn.
Needleman: As a phenomenon, apart from what is underneath it
all, this interest in transcending experience - or whatever one wants
to call it - seems to be a kind of seed-ground from which certain
unusual people aside from all the phoneyness and all the deceivers,
certain Masters perhaps, may spring up.
Krishnamurti: But I am not sure, Sir, that all the deceivers and
exploiters are not covering this up. "Krishna-consciousness" and
Transcendental Meditation and all this nonsense that is going on they are caught in all that. It is a form of exhibitionism, a form of
amusement and entertainment. For something new to take place
there must be a nucleus of really devoted, serious people, who go
through to the very end. After going through all these things, they
say, "Here is something I am going to pursue to the end."
Needleman: A serious person would be someone who would
have to become disillusioned with everything else.
Krishnamurti: I would not call it disillusioned but a form of
seriousness.
Needleman: But a precondition for it?
Krishnamurti: No, I wouldn't call it disillusionment at all, that
leads to despair and cynicism. I mean the examination of all the
things that are so-called religious, so-called spiritual: to examine,
to find out what is the truth in all this, whether there is any truth in
it. Or to discard the whole thing and start anew, and not go through
all the trappings, all the mess of it.
Needleman: I think that is what I tried to say, but this expresses
it better. People who have tried something and it has failed for

them.
Krishnamurti: Not "other people". I mean one has to discard all
the promises, all the experiences, all the mystical assertions. I think
one has to start as though one knew absolutely nothing.
Needleman: That is very hard.
Krishnamurti: No, Sir, I don't think that is hard. I think it is hard
only for those people who have filled themselves with other
people's knowledge.
Needleman: Isn't that most of us? I was speaking to my class
yesterday at San Francisco State, and I said I was going to
interview Krishnamurti and what question would you like me to
ask him. They had many questions, but the one that touched me
most was what one young man said: "I have read his books over
and over again and I can't do what he says." There was something
so clear about that, it rang a bell. It seems in a certain subtle sense
to begin in this way. To be a beginner, fresh!
Krishnamurti: I don't think that we question enough. Do you
know what I mean?
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: We accept, we are gullible, we are greedy for
new experiences. People swallow what is said by anybody with a
beard, with promises, saying you will have a marvellous
experience if you do certain things! I think one has to say: "I know
nothing." Obviously I can't rely on others. If there were no books,
no gurus, what would you do?
Needleman: But one is so easily deceived.
Krishnamurti: You are deceived when you want something.
Needleman: Yes, I understand that.

Krishnamurti: So you say, I am going to find out, I am going to
enquire step by step. I don't want to deceive myself" Deception
arises when I want, when I am greedy, when I say, "All experience
is shallow, I want something mysterious" - then I am caught.
Needleman: To me you are speaking about a state, an attitude,
an approach, which is itself very far along in understanding for a
man. I feel very far from that myself,and I know my students do.
And so they feel, rightly or wrongly, a need for help. They
probably misunderstand what help is, but is there such a thing as
help?
Krishnamurti: Would you say: "Why do you ask for help?"
Needleman: Let me put it like this. You sort of smell yourself
deceiving yourself, you don't exactly know... Krishnamurti: It is
fairly simple. I don't want to deceive myself - right? So I find out
what is the movement, what is the thing that brings deception.
Obviously it is when I am greedy, when I want something, when I
am dissatisfied. So instead of attacking greed, want, dissatisfaction,
I want something more.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So I have to understand my greed. What am I
greedy for? Is it because I am fed up with this world, I have had
women, I have had cars, I have had money and I want something
more?
Needleman: I think one is greedy because one desires
stimulation, to be taken out of oneself,so that one doesn't see the
poverty of oneself. But what I am trying to ask - I know you have
answered this question many times in your talks, but it keeps
recurring, almost unavoidably - the great traditions of the world,

aside from what has become of them (they have become distorted
and misinterpreted and deceptive) always speak directly or
indirectly of help. They say "The guru is yourself too", but at the
same time there is help.
Krishnamurti: Sir, you know what that word "guru" means?
Needleman: No, not exactly.
Krishnamurti: The one who points. That is one meaning.
Another meaning is the one who brings enlightenment, lifts your
burden. But instead of lifting your burden they impose their burden
on you.
Needleman: I am afraid so.
Krishnamurti: Guru also means one who helps you to cross over
- and so on, there are various meanings. The moment the guru says
he knows, then you may be sure he doesn't know. Because what he
knows is something past, obviously. Knowledge is the past. And
when he says he knows, he is thinking of some experience which
he has had, which he has been able to recognise as something
great, and that recognition is born out of his previous knowledge,
otherwise he couldn't recognise it, and therefore his experience has
its roots in the past. Therefore it is not real. Needleman: Well, I
think that most knowledge is that.
Krishnamurti: So why do we want any form of ancient or
modern tradition in all this? Look, Sir, I don't read any religious,
philosophical, psychological books: one can go into oneself at
tremendous depths and find out everything. To go into oneself is
the problem, how to do it. Not being able to do it one asks, "Would
you please help me?"
Needleman: Yes.

Krishnamurti: And the other fellow says, "I'll help you" and
pushes you off somewhere else.
Needleman: Well, it sort of answers the question. I was reading
a book the other day which spoke of something called "Sat-san".
Krishnamurti: Do you know what it means?
Needleman: Association with the wise.
Krishnamurti: No, with good people.
Needleman: With good people, Ah!
Krishnamurti: Being good you are wise. Not, being wise you
are good.
Needleman: I understand that.
Krishnamurti: Because you are good, you are wise.
Needleman: I am not trying to pin this down to something, but I
find my students and I myself,speaking for myself, when we read,
when we hear you, we say, "Ah! I need no one, I need to be with
no one" - and there is a tremendous deception in this too.
Krishnamurti: Naturally, because you are being influenced by
the speaker.
Needleman: Yes. That is true. (Laughter.)
Krishnamurti: Sir, look, let's be very simple. Suppose, if there
were no book, no guru, no teacher, what would you do? One is in
turmoil, confusion, agony, what would you do? With nobody to
help you, no drugs, no tranquillisers, no organized religions, what
would you do? Needleman: I can't imagine what I would do.
Krishnamurti: That's it.
Needleman: Perhaps there would be a moment of urgency there.
Krishnamurti: That's it. We haven't the urgency because we say,
"Well, somebody is going to help me."

Needleman: But most people would be driven insane by that
situation.
Krishnamurti: I am not sure, Sir.
Needleman: I'm not sure either.
Krishnamurti: No, I am not at all sure. Because what have we
done up to now? The people on whom we have relied, the
religions, the churches, education, they have led us to this awful
mess. We aren't free of sorrow, we aren't free of our beastliness,
our ugliness, our vanities.
Needleman: Can one say that of all of them? There are
differences. For every thousand deceivers there is one Buddha.
Krishnamurti: But that is not my concern, Sir, if we say that it
leads to such deception. No, no.
Needleman: Then let me ask you this. We know that without
hard work the body may get ill, and this hard work is what we call
effort. Is there another effort for what we might call the spirit? You
speak against effort, but does not the growth and well-being of all
sides of man demand something like hard work of one sort or
another?
Krishnamurti: I wonder what you mean by hard work! Physical
hard work?
Needleman: That is what we usually mean by hard work. Or
going against desires.
Krishnamurti: You see, there we are! Our conditioning, our
culture, is built around this "going against". Erecting a wall of
resistance. So when we say "hard work", what do we mean?
Laziness? Why have I to make an effort about anything? Why?
Needleman: Because I wish for something. Krishnamurti: No.

Why is there this cult of effort? Why have I to make effort to reach
God, enlightenment, truth?
Needleman: There are many possible answers, but I can only
answer for myself.
Krishnamurti: It may be just there, only I don't know how to
look.
Needleman: But then there must be am obstacle.
Krishnamurti: How to look! It may be just round the comer,
under the flower, it may be anywhere. So first I have to learn to
look, not make an effort to look. I must find out what it means to
look.
Needleman: Yes, but don't you admit that there may be a
resistance to that looking?
Krishnamurti: Then don't bother to look! If somebody comes
along and says, "I don't want to look", how are you going to force
him to look?
Needleman: No. I am speaking about myself now. I want to
look.
Krishnamurti: If you want to look, what do you mean by
looking? You must find out what it means to look before you make
an effort to look. Right, Sir?
Needleman: That would be, to me, an effort.
Krishnamurti: No.
Needleman: To do it in that delicate, subtle way. I wish to look,
but I don't wish to find out what it means to look. I agree this is
much more to me the basic thing. But this wish to do it quickly, to
get it over, is this not resistance?
Krishnamurti: Quick medicine to get it over.

Needleman: Is there something in me that I have to study, that
resists this subtle, much more delicate thing you are speaking
about? Is this not work, what you are saying? Isn't it work to ask
the question so quietly, so subtly? It seems to me it is work to not
listen to that part that wants to do it... Krishnamurti: Quickly.
Needleman: For us particularly in the West, or maybe for all
men.
Krishnamurti: I am afraid it is all over the world the same. "Tell
me how to get there quickly."
Needleman: And yet you say it is in a moment.
Krishnamurti: It is, obviously.
Needleman: Yes, I understand.
Krishnamurti: Sir, what is effort? To get out of bed in the
morning, when you don't want to get up, is an effort. What brings
on that laziness? Lack of sleep, overeating, over-indulging and all
the rest of it; and next morning you say, "Oh, what a bore, I have to
get up!" Now wait a minute, Sir, follow it. What is laziness? Is it
physical laziness, or is thought itself lazy?
Needleman: That I don't understand. I need another word.
"Thought is lazy?" I find that thought is always the same.
Krishnamurti: No Sir. I am lazy, I don't want to get up and so I
force myself to get up. In that is so-called effort.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: I want that, but I shouldn't have it, I resist it. The
resistance is effort. I get angry and I mustn't be angry: resistance,
effort. What has made me lazy?
Needleman: The thought that I ought to be getting up.
Krishnamurti: That's it.

Needleman: All right.
Krishnamurti: So I really have to go into this whole question of
thought. Not make out that the body is lazy, force the body out of
bed, because the body has its own intelligence, it knows when it is
tired and should rest. This morning I was tired; I had prepared the
mat and everything to do yoga exercises and the body said "No,
sorry". And I said, "All right". That is not laziness. The body said,
"Leave me alone because you talked yesterday, you saw many
people, you are tired." Thought then says, "You must get up and do
the exercises because it is good for you, you have done it every
day, it has become a habit, don't relax, you will get lazy, keep at
it." Which means: thought is making me lazy, not the body is
making me lazy.
Needleman: I understand that. So there is an effort with regard
to thought.
Krishnamurti: So no effort! Why is thought so mechanical? And
is all thought mechanical?
Needleman: Yes, all right, one puts that question.
Krishnamurti: Isn't it?
Needleman: I can't say that I have verified that.
Krishnamurti: But we can, Sir. That is fairly simple to see. Isn't
all thought mechanical? The non-mechanical state is the absence of
thought; not the neglect of thought but the absence of it.
Needleman: How can I find that out?
Krishnamurti: Do it now, it is simple enough. You can do it
now if you wish to. Thought is mechanical.
Needleman: Let's assume that.
Krishnamurti: Not assume. Don't assume anything.

Needleman: All right.
Krishnamurti: Thought is mechanical, isn't it? - because it is
repetitive, conforming, comparing.
Needleman: That part I see, the comparing. But my experience
is that not all thought is of the same quality. There are qualities of
thought.
Krishnamurti: Are there?
Needleman: In my experience there are.
Krishnamurti: Let's find out. What is thought, thinking?
Needleman: There seems to be thought that is very shallow,
very repetitive, very mechanical, it has a certain taste to it. There
seems to be another kind of thought which is connected more with
my body, with my whole self, it resonates in another way.
Krishnamurti: That is what, Sir? Thought is the response of
memory.
Needleman: All right, this is a definition.
Krishnamurti: No, no, I can see it in myself. I have to go to that
house this evening - the memory, the distance, the design - all that
is memory, isn't it?
Needleman: Yes, that is memory.
Krishnamurti: I have been there before and so the memory is
well established and from that there is either instant thought, or
thought which takes a little time. So I am asking myself: is all
thought similar, mechanical, or is there thought which is nonmechanical, which is non-verbal?
Needleman: Yes, that's right.
Krishnamurti: Is there thought if there is no word?
Needleman: There is understanding.

Krishnamurti: Wait, Sir. How does this understanding take
place? Does it happen when thought is functioning rapidly, or
when thought is quiet?
Needleman: When thought is quiet, yes.
Krishnamurti: Understanding is nothing to do with thought. You
may reason, which is the process of thinking, logic, till you say, "I
don't understand it; then you become silent, and you say, "Ah! I see
it, I understand it." That understanding is not a result of thought.
Needleman: You speak of an energy which seems to be
uncaused. We experience the energy of cause and effect, which
shapes our lives, but what is this other energy's relationship to the
energy we are familiar with? What is energy?
Krishnamurti: First of all: is energy divisible?
Needleman: I don't know. Go on. Krishnamurti: It can be
divided. Physical energy, the energy of anger and so on, cosmic
energy, human energy, it can all be divided. But it is all one
energy, isn't it?
Needleman: Logically, I say yes. I don't understand energy.
Sometimes I experience the thing which I call energy.
Krishnamurti: Why do we divide energy at all, that is what I
want to get at; then we can come to it differently. Sexual energy,
physical energy, mental energy, psychological energy, cosmic
energy, the energy of the businessman who goes to the office and
so on - why do we divide it? What is the reason for this division?
Needleman: There seem to be many parts of oneself which are
separate; and we divide life, it seems to me, because of that.
Krishnamurti: Why? We have divided the world into
Communist, Socialist, Imperialist, and Catholic, Protestant, Hindu,

Buddhist, and nationalities, linguistic divisions, the whole thing is
fragmentation. Why has the mind fragmented the whole of life?
Needleman: I don't know the answer. I see the ocean and I see a
tree: there is a division.
Krishnamurti: No. There is a difference between the sea and the
tree - I hope so! But that is not a division.
Needleman: No. It is a difference, not a division.
Krishnamurti: But we are asking why the division exists, not
only outwardly but in us.
Needleman: It is in us, that is the most interesting question.
Krishnamurti: Because it is in us we extend it outwards. Now
why is there this division in me? The "me" and the "not me". You
follow? The higher and the lower, the Atman and the lower self.
Why this division?
Needleman: Maybe it was done, at least in the beginning, to
help men to question themselves. To make them question whether
they really know what they think they know.
Krishnamurti: Through division will they find out? Needleman:
Maybe through the idea that there is something that I don't
understand.
Krishnamurti: In a human being there is a division - why? What
is the "raison d'etre", what is the structure of this division? I see
there is a thinker and thought - right?
Needleman: I don't see that.
Krishnamurti: There is a thinker who says, "I must control that
thought, I must not think this, I must think that". So there is a
thinker who says, "I must", or "I must not".
Needleman: Right.

Krishnamurti: There is the division. "I should be this", and "I
should not be that". If I can understand why this division in me
exists - Oh look, look! Look at those hills! Marvellous, isn't it?
Needleman: Beautiful!
Krishnamurti: Now, Sir, do you look at it with a division?
Needleman: No.
Krishnamurti: Why not?
Needleman: There wasn't the "me" to do anything with it.
Krishnamurti: That's all. You can't do anything about it. Here,
with thought, I think I can do something.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So I want to change "what is". I can't change
"what is" there, but I think I can change "what is" in me. Not
knowing how to change it I have become desperate, lost, in
despair. I say, "I can't change", and therefore I have no energy to
change.
Needleman: That's what one says.
Krishnamurti: So first, before I change "what is", I must know
who is the changer, who it is that changes.
Needleman: There are moments when one knows that, for a
moment. Those moments are lost. There are moments when one
knows who sees "what is" in oneself. Krishnamurti: No Sir. Sorry.
just to see "what is" is enough, not to change it.
Needleman: I agree. I agree with that.
Krishnamurti: I can see "what is" only when the observer is not.
When you looked at those hills the observer was not.
Needleman: I agree, yes.
Krishnamurti: The observer only came into being when you

wanted to change "what is". You say: I don't like "what is", it must
be changed, so there is instantly a duality. Can the mind observe
"what is" without the observer? It took place when you looked at
those hills with that marvellous light on them.
Needleman: This truth is absolute truth. The moment one
experiences it one says, "Yes!" But one's experience is also that
one forgets this.
Krishnamurti: Forget!
Needleman: By that I mean one continually tries to change it.
Krishnamurti: Forget it, and pick it up again.
Needleman: But in this discussion - whatever you intend - there
is help coming from this discussion. I know, as much as I know
anything, it could not happen without the help that is between us. I
could look at those hills and maybe have this non-judging, but it
wouldn't be important to me; I wouldn't know that that is the way I
must look for salvation. And this, I think, is a question one always
wants to bring. Maybe this is the mind again wanting to grab and
hold on to something, but nevertheless it seems that the human
condition...
Krishnamurti: Sir, we looked at those hills, you couldn't change
that, you just looked; and you looked inwardly and the battle
began. For a moment you looked without that battle, without that
strife, and all the rest of it. Then you remembered the beauty of
that moment, of that second, and you wanted to capture that beauty
again. Wait Sir! Proceed. So what happens? It sets up another
conflict: the thing you had and you would like to have again, and
you don't know how to get it again. You know, if you think about
it, it is not the same, it is not that. So you strive, battle. "I must

control, I mustn't want" - right? Whereas if you say, "All right, it is
over, finished", that moment is over.
Needleman: I have to learn that.
Krishnamurti: No, no.
Needleman: I have to learn, don't I?
Krishnamurti: What is there to learn?
Needleman: I have to learn the futility of this conflict.
Krishnamurti: No. What is there to learn? You yourself see that
that moment of beauty becomes a memory, then the memory says,
"It was so beautiful I must have it again." You are not concerned
with beauty, you are concerned with the pursuit of pleasure.
Pleasure and beauty don't go together. So if you see that, it is
finished. Like a dangerous snake, you won't go near it again.
Needleman: (Laughs) Perhaps I haven't seen it, so I can't say.
Krishnamurti: That is the question.
Needleman: Yes, I think that must be so, because one keeps
going back again and again.
Krishnamurti: No. This is the real thing. If I see the beauty of
that light, and it is really extraordinarily beautiful, I just see it.
Now with that same quality of attention I want to see myself. There
is a moment of perception which is as beautiful as that. Then what
happens?
Needleman: Then I wish for it.
Krishnamurti: Then I want to capture it, I want to cultivate it, I
want to pursue it.
Needleman: And how to see that?
Krishnamurti: Just to see that is taking place is enough.
Needleman: That's what I forget!

Krishnamurti: It is not a question of forgetting. Needleman:
Well, that is what I don't understand deeply enough. That just the
seeing is enough.
Krishnamurti: Look, Sir. When you see a snake what takes
place?
Needleman: I am afraid.
Krishnamurti: No. What takes place? You run, kill it, do
something. Why? Because you know it is dangerous. You are
aware of the danger of it. A cliff, better take a cliff, an abyss. You
know the danger of it. Nobody has to tell you. You see directly
what would happen.
Needleman: Right.
Krishnamurti: Now, if you see directly that the beauty of that
moment of perception cannot be repeated, it is over. But thought
says, "No, it's not over, the memory of it remains." So what are you
doing now? You are pursuing the dead memory of it, not the living
beauty of it - right? Now if you see that, the truth of it - not the
verbal statement, the truth of it - it is finished.
Needleman: Then this seeing is much rarer than we think.
Krishnamurti: If I see the beauty of that minute, it is over. I
don't want to pursue it. If I pursue it, it becomes a pleasure. Then if
I can't get it, it brings despair, pain and all the rest of it. So I say,
"All right, finished." Then what takes place?
Needleman: From my experience, I'm afraid that what takes
place is that the monster is born again. It has a thousand lives.
(Laughter.)
Krishnamurti: No Sir. When did that beauty take placer.
Needleman: The place when I saw without trying to change.

Krishnamurti: When the mind was completely quiet.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Wasn't it? Right?
Needleman: Yes. Krishnamurti: When you looked at that, your
mind was quiet, it didn't say, "I wish I could change it, copy it and
photograph it, this, that, and the other" - you just looked. The mind
wasn't in operation. Or rather, thought wasn't in operation. But
thought comes immediately into operation. Now one has asked,
"How can thought be quiet? How can one exercise thought when
necessary, and not exercise it when it is not necessary?"
Needleman: Yes, that question is intensely interesting to me,
Sir.
Krishnamurti: That is, why do we worship thought? Why has
thought become so extraordinarily important?
Needleman: It seems able to satisfy our desires; through thought
we believe we can satisfy.
Krishnamurti: No, not from satisfaction. Why has thought in all
cultures with most people become of such vital concern?
Needleman: One usually identifies oneself as thought, as one's
thoughts. If I think about myself I think about what I think, what
kind of ideas I have, what I believe. Is this what you mean?
Krishnamurti: Not quite. Apart from identification with the
"me", or with "not me", why is thought always active?
Needleman: Ah, I see.
Krishnamurti: Thought is always operating in knowledge, isn't
it? If there was no knowledge, thought would not be. Thought is
always operating in the field of the known. Whether mechanical,
non-verbal and so on, it is always working in the past. So my life is

the past, because it is based on past knowledge, past experience,
past memories, pleasure, pain, fear and so on - it is all the past.
And the future I project from the past, thought projects from the
past. So thought is fluctuating between the past and the future. All
the time it says, "I should do this, I should not do that, I should
have behaved." Why is it doing all this?
Needleman: I don't know. Habit?
Krishnamurti: Habit. All right. Go on. Let's find out. Habit?
Needleman: Habit brings what I call pleasure. Krishnamurti:
Habit, pleasure, pain.
Needleman: To protect me. Pain, yes pain.
Krishnamurti: It is always working within that field. Why?
Needleman: Because it doesn't know any better.
Krishnamurti: No. No. Can thought work in any other field?
Needleman: That sort of thought, no.
Krishnamurti: No, not any thought. Can thought work in any
other field except in the field of the known?
Needleman: No.
Krishnamurti: Obviously not. It can't work in something I don't
know; it can only work in this field. Now why does it work in this?
There it is, Sir - why? It is the only thing I know. In that there is
security, there is protection, there is safety. That is all I know. So
thought can only function in the field of the known. And when it
gets tired of that, as it does, then it seeks something outside. Then
what it seeks is still the known. Its gods, its visions, its spiritual
states - all projected out of the known past into the future known.
So thought always works in this field.
Needleman: Yes, I see.

Krishnamurti: Therefore thought is always working in a prison.
It can call it freedom, it can call it beauty, it can call it what is
likes! But it is always within the limitations of the barbed wire
fence. Now I want to find out whether thought has any place
except in there. Thought has no place when I say, "I don't know."
"I really don't know." Right?
Needleman: For the moment.
Krishnamurti: I really don't know. I only know this, and I really
don't know whether thought can function in any field at all, except
this. I really don't know. When I say, "I don't know", which doesn't
mean I am expecting to know, when I say I really don't know what happens? I climb down the ladder. I become, the mind
becomes, completely humble. Now that state of "not knowing" is
intelligence. Then it can operate in the field of the known and be
free to work somewhere else if it wants to.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART I
CHAPTER 2 2ND CONVERSATION WITH
JACOB NEEDLEMAN MALIBU CALIFORNIA
26TH MARCH 1971 'ON INNER SPACE; ON
TRADITION AND DEPENDENCE'
Needleman: In your talks you have given a fresh meaning to the
necessity for man to become his own authority. Yet cannot this
assertion easily be turned into a form of humanistic psychology
without reference to the sacred, transcendent dimension of human
life on earth in the midst of a vast intelligent Cosmos? Must we not
only try to see ourselves in the moment, but also as creatures of the
Cosmos? What I am trying to ask about is this question of cosmic
dimension.
Krishnamurti: As soon as we use that word "dimension", it
implies space, otherwise there is no dimension, there is no space.
Are we talking about space, outward space, endless space?
Needleman: No.
Krishnamurti: Or the dimension of space in us?
Needleman: It would have to be the latter, but not totally
without the former, I think.
Krishnamurti: Is there a difference between the outer space,
which is limitless, and the space in us? Or is there no space in us at
all and we only know the outer space? We know the space in us as
a centre and circumference. The dimension of that centre, and the
radius from that centre, is what we generally call that space.
Needleman: Inner space, yes.
Krishnamurti: Yes, inner space. Now if there is a centre, the

space must always be limited and therefore we divide the inner
space from the outer space. Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: We only know this very limited space but we
think we would like to reach the other space, have immense space.
This house exists in space, otherwise there could be no house, and
the four walls of this room make its space. And the space in me is
the space which the centre has created round itself. Like that
microphone...
Needleman: Yes, centre of interest.
Krishnamurti: Not only centre of interest, it has its own space,
otherwise it couldn't exist.
Needleman: Yes, right.
Krishnamurti: In the same way, human beings may have a
centre and from that centre they create a space, the centre creates a
space round itself. And that space is always limited, it must be;
because of the centre, the space is limited.
Needleman: It is defined, it is a defined space, yes.
Krishnamurti: When you use the words "cosmic space"...
Needleman: I didn't use the words "cosmic space; I said cosmic,
the dimension of the Cosmos. I wasn't asking about outer space and
trips to the planets.
Krishnamurti: So we are talking of the space which the centre
creates round itself, and also a space between two thoughts; there is
a space, an interval between two thoughts.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: And the centre having created that space round
itself, there is the space outside the limit. There is a space between
thinking, between thoughts; and also a space round the centre

itself, and the space beyond the barbed wire. Now what is the
question, Sir? How to expand space? How to enter a different
dimension of space?
Needleman: Not how to but...
Krishnamurti: ...not how to. Is there a different dimension of
space except the space round the centre? Needleman: Or a different
dimension of reality?
Krishnamurti: Space, we are talking about that for the moment,
we can use that word. First I must see very clearly the space
between two thoughts.
Needleman: The interval.
Krishnamurti: This interval between two thoughts. Interval
means space. And what takes place in this interval?
Needleman: Well, I confess I don't know because my thoughts
overlap all the time. I know there are intervals, there are moments
when this interval appears, and I see it, and there is freedom there
for a moment.
Krishnamurti: Let's go into this a bit, shall we? There is space
between two thoughts. And there is space which the centre creates
round itself, which is the space of isolation.
Needleman: All right, yes. That is a cold word.
Krishnamurti: It is cutting itself off. I consider myself
important, with my ambition, with my frustrations, with my anger,
with my sexuality, my growth, my meditation, my reaching
Nirvana.
Needleman: Yes, that is isolation.
Krishnamurti: It is isolation. My relation with you is the image
of that isolation, which is that space. Then having created that

space there is space outside the barbed wire. Now is there a space
of a totally different dimension? That is the question.
Needleman: Yes, that embraces the question.
Krishnamurti: How shall we find out if the space round me,
round the centre, exists? And how can I find out the other? I can
speculate about the other, I can invent any space I like - but that is
too abstract, too silly!
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So is it possible to be free of the centre, so that
the centre doesn't create space round itself build a wall round itself,
isolation, a prison - and call that space? Can that centre cease to
be? Otherwise I can't go beyond it; the mind cannot go beyond that
limitation.
Needleman: Yes, I see what you mean. It's logical, reasonable.
Krishnamurti: That is, what is that centre? That centre is the
"me" and "non-me", that centre is the observer, the thinker, the
experiencer, and in that centre is also the observed. The centre
says, "That is the barbed wire I have created round myself."
Needleman: So that centre is limited there too.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Therefore it separates itself from the barbed
wire fence. So that becomes the observed. The centre is the
observer. So there is space between the observer and the observed right Sir?
Needleman: Yes, I see that.
Krishnamurti: And that space it tries to bridge over. That is
what we are doing.
Needleman: It tries to bridge it over.
Krishnamurti: It says, "This must be changed, that must not be,

this is narrow, that is wide, I must be better than that." All that is
the movement in the space between the observer and the observed.
Needleman: I follow that, yes.
Krishnamurti: And hence there is conflict between the observer
and the observed. Because the observed is the barbed wire which
must be jumped over, and so the battle begins. Now can the
observer - who is the centre, who is the thinker, who is the knower,
who is experience, who is knowledge - can that centre be still?
Needleman: Why should it wish to?
Krishnamurti: If it is not still, the space is always limited.
Needleman: But the centre, the observer, doesn't know that it is
limited in this way. Krishnamurti: But you can see it, look. The
centre is the observer, let's call him the observer for the moment the thinker, the experiencer, the knower, the struggler, the searcher,
the one who says, "I know, and you don't know." Right? Where
there is a centre it must have a space round itself.
Needleman: Yes, I follow.
Krishnamurti: And when it observes, it observes through that
space. When I observe those mountains there is space between me
and the mountains. And when I observe myself there is space
between me and the thing I observe in myself. When I observe my
wife, I observe her from the centre of my image about her, and she
observes me with the image which she has about me. So there is
always this division and space.
Needleman: Changing the approach to the subject entirely, there
is something called the sacred. Sacred teachings, sacred ideas, the
sacred, which for a moment seems to show me that this centre and
this space you speak about is an illusion.

Krishnamurti: Wait. One has learnt this from somebody else.
Are we going to find out what is the sacred, then? Are we looking
because somebody has told me, "That is sacred", or that there is a
sacred thing? Or is it my imagination, because I want something
holy?
Needleman: Very often it is that but there is...
Krishnamurti: Now which is it? The desire for something holy?
The imposition on my mind by others who have said, "This is
sacred?" Or my own desire, because everything is unholy and I
want something holy, sacred? All this springs from the centre.
Needleman: Yes. Nevertheless...
Krishnamurti: Wait. We will find this out, what is sacred. But I
don't want to accept tradition, or what somebody has said about the
sacred. Sir, I don't know if you have experimented? Some years
ago, for fun, I took a piece of rock from the garden and put it on
the mantelpiece and played with it, brought flowers to it every day.
At the end of a month it became terribly sacred! Needleman: I
know what you mean.
Krishnamurti: I don't want that kind of phoney sacredness.
Needleman: It's a fetish.
Krishnamurti: Sacredness is a fetish.
Needleman: Granted. Most of it is.
Krishnamurti: So I won't accept anything that anybody says
about what is sacred. Tradition! As a Brahmin one was brought up
in a tradition which would beat anybody's tradition, I assure you!
What I am saying is: I want to find out what is holy, not manmade holiness. I can only find out when the mind has immense
space. And it cannot have that immense space if there is a centre.

When the centre is not in operation, then there is vast space. In that
space, which is part of meditation, there is something really sacred,
not invented by my foolish little centre. There is something
immeasurably sacred, which you can never find out if there is a
centre. And to imagine that sacredness is folly - you follow what I
mean?
Can the mind be free of this centre - with its terribly limited
yardage of space - which can be measured and expanded and
contracted and all the rest of it? Can it? Man has said it can't, and
therefore God has become another centre. So my real concern is
this: whether the centre can be completely empty? That centre is
consciousness. That centre is the content of consciousness, the
content is consciousness; there is no consciousness if there is no
content. You must work this out...
Needleman: Certainly what we ordinarily mean by it, yes.
Krishnamurti: There is no house if there are no walls and no
roof. The content is consciousness but we like to separate them,
theorize about it, measure the yardage of our consciousness.
Whereas the centre is consciousness, the content of consciousness,
and the content is consciousness. Without the content, where is
consciousness? And that is the space.
Needleman: I follow a little bit of what you say. I find myself
wanting to say: well, what do you value here? What is the
important thing here? Krishnamurti: I'll put that question after I
have found out whether the mind can be empty of the content.
Needleman: All right.
Krishnamurti: Then there is something else that will operate,
which will function within the field of the known. But without

finding that merely to say...
Needleman: No, no, this is so.
Krishnamurti: Let's proceed. Space is between two thoughts,
between two factors of time, two periods of time, because thought
is time. Yes?
Needleman: All right, yes.
Krishnamurti: You can have a dozen periods of time but it is
still thought, there is that space. Then there is the space round the
centre, and the space beyond the self,beyond the barbed wire,
beyond the wall of the centre. The space between the observer and
the observed is the space which thought has created as the image of
my wife and the image which she has about me. You follow, Sir?
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: All that is manufactured by the centre. To
speculate about what is beyond all that has no meaning to me
personally, it's the philosopher's amusement.
Needleman: The philosopher's amusement...
Krishnamurti: I am not interested.
Needleman: I agree. I am not interested sometimes, at my better
moments, but nevertheless...
Krishnamurti: I am sorry, because you are a philosopher!
Needleman: No, no, why should you remember that, please.
Krishnamurti: So my question is: "Can the centre be still, or can
the centre fade away?" Because if it doesn't fade away, or lie very
quiet, then the content of consciousness is going to create space
within consciousness and call it the vast space. In that there lies
deception and I don't want to deceive myself. I don't say I am not
brown when I am brown. So can that centre be absorbed? Which

means, can there be no image, because it is the image that
separates?
Needleman: Yes, that is the space.
Krishnamurti: That image talks about love, but the love of the
image is not love. Therefore I must find out whether the centre can
be completely absorbed, dissolved, or lie as a vague fragment in
the distance. If there is no possibility of that, then I must accept
prison.
Needleman: I agree.
Krishnamurti: I must accept there is no freedom. Then I can
decorate my prison for ever.
Needleman: But now this possibility that you are speaking
about, without searching for it consciously...
Krishnamurti: No, don't search for it!
Needleman: I say, without searching for it consciously, life or
something suddenly shows me it is possible.
Krishnamurti: It is there! Life hasn't shown me. It has shown
me, when I look at that mountain, that there is an image in me;
when I look at my wife I see that there is an image in me. That is a
fact. It isn't that I have to wait for ten years to find out about the
image! I know it is there, therefore I say: "Is it possible to look
without the image?" The image is the centre, the observer, the
thinker and all the rest of it.
Needleman: I am beginning to see the answer to my question. I
begin to see - I am speaking to myself - I am beginning to see that
there is no distinction between humanism and sacred teachings.
There is just truth, or non-truth.
Krishnamurti: That's all. False and true.

Needleman: So much for that. (Laughter)
Krishnamurti: We are asking: "Can the consciousness empty
itself of its content?" Not somebody else do it.
Needleman: That is the question, yes. Krishnamurti: Not divine
grace, the super-self, some fictitious outside agency. Can the
consciousness empty itself of all this content? First see the beauty
of it, Sir.
Needleman: I see it.
Krishnamurti: Because it must empty itself without an effort.
The moment there is an effort, there is the observer who is making
the effort to change the content, which is part of consciousness. I
don't know if you see that?
Needleman: I follow. This emptying has to be effortless,
instantaneous.
Krishnamurti: It must be without an agent who is operating on
it, whether an outside agent, or an inner agent. Now can this be
done without any effort, any directive - which says, "I will change
the content"? This means the emptying of consciousness of all will,
"to be" or "not to be". Sir, look what takes place.
Needleman: I am watching.
Krishnamurti: I have put that question to myself. Nobody has
put it to me. Because it is a problem of life, a problem of existence
in this world. It is a problem which my mind has to solve. Can the
mind, with all its content, empty itself and yet remain mind - not
just float about?
Needleman: It is not suicide.
Krishnamurti: No.
Needleman: There is some kind of subtle...

Krishnamurti: No, Sir, that is too immature. I have put the
question. My answer is: I really don't know.
Needleman: That is the truth.
Krishnamurti: I really don't know. But I am going to find out, in
the sense of not waiting to find out. The content of my
consciousness is my unhappiness, my misery, my struggles, my
sorrows, the images which I have collected through life, my gods,
the frustrations, the pleasures, the fears, the agonies, the hatreds that is my consciousness. Can all that be completely emptied? Not
only at the superficial level but right through? - the so-called
unconscious. If it is not possible, then I must live a life of misery, I
must live in endless, unending sorrow. There Is neither hope, nor
despair, I am in prison. So the mind must find out how to empty
itself of all the content of itself, and yet live in this world, not
become a moron, but have a brain that functions efficiently. Now
how is this to be done? Can it ever be done? Or is there no escape
for man?
Needleman: I follow.
Krishnamurti: Because I don't see how to get beyond this I
invent all the gods, temples, philosophies, rituals - you understand?
Needleman: I understand.
Krishnamurti: This is meditation, real meditation, not all the
phoney stuff. To see whether the mind - with the brain which has
evolved through time, which is the result of thousands of
experiences, the brain that functions efficiently only in complete
security - whether the mind can empty itself and yet have a brain
that functions as a marvellous machine. Also, it sees love is not
pleasure; love is not desire. When there is love there is no image;

but I don't know what that love is. I only want love as pleasure, sex
and all the rest of it. There must be a relationship between the
emptying of consciousness and the thing called love; between the
unknown and the known, which is the content of consciousness.
Needleman: I am following you. There must be this
relationship.
Krishnamurti: The two must be in harmony. The emptying and
love must be in harmony. And it may be only love that is necessary
and nothing else.
Needleman: This emptying is another word for love, is that
what you are saying?
Krishnamurti: I am only asking what is love. Is love within the
field of consciousness?
Needleman: No, it couldn't be.
Krishnamurti: Don't stipulate. Don't ever say yes or no; find
out! Love within the content of consciousness is pleasure, ambition and all that. Then what is love? I really don't know. I won't
pretend any more about anything. I don't know. There is some
factor in this which I must find out. Whether the emptying of
consciousness with its content is love, which is the unknown?
What is the relationship between the unknown and the known? not the mysterious unknown, God or whatever name you give it.
We will come to God if we go through this. The relationship
between the unknown, which I don't know, which may be called
love, and the content of consciousness, which I know, (it may be
unconscious, but I can open it up and find out) - what is the
relationship between the known and the unknown? To move
between the known and the unknown is harmony, is intelligence,

isn't it?
Needleman: Absolutely.
Krishnamurti: So I must find out, the mind must find out, how
to empty its content. That is, have no image, therefore no observer.
The image means the past, or the image which is taking place now,
or the image which I shall project into the future. So no image - no
formula, idea, ideal, principle - all that implies image. Can there be
no formation of image at all? You hurt me or you give me pleasure
and therefore I have an image of you. So no image formation when
you hurt me or give me pleasure.
Needleman: Is it possible?
Krishnamurti: Of course it is. Otherwise I am doomed.
Needleman: You are doomed. In other words I am doomed.
Krishnamurti: We are doomed. Is it possible when you insult
me to be completely watchful, attentive, so that it doesn't leave a
mark?
Needleman: I know what you mean.
Krishnamurti: When you flatter me - no mark. Then there is no
image. So I have done it, the mind has done it: which is, no
formation of image at all. If you don't form an image now, the past
images have no place.
Needleman: I don't follow that. "If I don't form an image
now..?" Krishnamurti: The past images have no place. If you form
an image, then you are related to it.
Needleman: You are connected to the past images. That is right.
Krishnamurti: But if you don't form any?
Needleman: Then you are free from the past.
Krishnamurti: See it! See it!

Needleman: Very clear.
Krishnamurti: So the mind can empty itself of images by not
forming an image now. If I form an image now, then I relate it with
past images. So consciousness, the mind, can empty itself of all the
images by not forming an image now. Then there is space, not
space round the centre. And if one delves, goes into it much
further, then there is something sacred, not invented by thought,
which has nothing to do with any religion.
Needleman: Thank you.
...
Needleman: I have another question which I wanted to ask you.
We see the stupidity of so many traditions which people hallow
today, but aren't there some traditions transmitted from generation
to generation which are valuable and necessary, and without which
we would lose the little humanity that we now have? Aren't there
traditions that are based on something real, which are handed
down?
Krishnamurti: Handed down...
Needleman: Ways of living, even if only in an external sense.
Krishnamurti: If I hadn't been taught from childhood not to run
in front of a car...
Needleman: That would be the simplest example.
Krishnamurti: Or to be careful of fire, be careful of irritating the
dog which might bite you, and so on. That is also tradition.
Needleman: Yes, that certainly is.
Krishnamurti: The other kind of tradition is that you must love.
Needleman: That is the other extreme.
Krishnamurti: And the tradition of the weavers in India and

other places. You know, they can weave without a pattern and yet
they weave in a tradition which is so deeply rooted that they don't
even have to think about it. It comes out with their hands. I don't
know if you have ever seen it? In India they have a tremendous
tradition and they produce marvellous things. Also there is the
tradition of the scientist, the biologist, the anthropologist, which is
tradition as the accumulation of knowledge, handed over by one
scientist to another scientist, by a doctor to another doctor,
learning. Obviously that kind of tradition is essential. I wouldn't
call that tradition, would you?
Needleman: No, that is not what I had in mind. What I meant by
tradition was a way of living.
Krishnamurti: I wouldn't call that tradition. Don't we mean by
tradition some other factor? Is goodness a factor of tradition?
Needleman: No, but perhaps there are good traditions.
Krishnamurti: Good traditions, conditioned by the culture in
which one lives. Good tradition among the Brahmins used to be not
to kill any human being or animal. They accepted that and
functioned. We are saying: "Is goodness traditional? Can goodness
function, blossom in tradition?"
Needleman: What I am asking then is: are there traditions which
are formed by an intelligence either single, or collective, which
understands human nature?
Krishnamurti: Is intelligence traditional?
Needleman: No. But can intelligence form, or shape a way of
living which can help other men more readily to find themselves? I
know that this is a self-initiated thing that you speak of but are
there not men of great intelligence who can shape the external

conditions for me, so that I will not have quite as difficult a time to
come to what you have seen?
Krishnamurti: That means what, Sir? You say you know.
Needleman: I don't say I know. Krishnamurti: I am taking that.
Suppose you are the great person of tremendous intelligence and
you say, "My dear son, live this way."
Needleman: Well I don't have to say it.
Krishnamurti: You exude your atmosphere, your aura, and then
I say, "I'll try it - he has got it, I haven't got it." Can goodness
flower in your ambience? Can goodness grow under your shadow?
Needleman: No, but then I wouldn't be intelligent if I made
those my conditions.
Krishnamurti: Therefore you are stating that goodness cannot
operate, function, flower in any environment.
Needleman: No, I didn't say that. I was asking, are there
environments which can be conducive to liberation?
Krishnamurti: We will go into this. A man who goes to a
factory every day, day after day, and finds release in drink and all
the rest of it...
Needleman: This is the example of a poor environment, a bad
tradition.
Krishnamurti: So what does the man who is intelligent, who is
concerned with changing the environment, do for that man?
Needleman: Perhaps he is changing the environment for
himself. But he understands something about man in general. I am
talking now about a great teacher, whatever that is. He helps, he
presents a way of life to us which we don't understand, which we
haven't verified ourselves, but which somehow acts on something

in us to bring us a little together.
Krishnamurti: That is satsun, which is the company of the good.
It is nice to be in the company of the good because we won't then
quarrel, we won't fight each other, we won't be violent; it is good.
Needleman: All right. But maybe the company of the good
means that I will quarrel, but I'll see it more, I'll suffer it more, I'll
understand it better. Krishnamurti: So you want the company of the
good in order to see yourself more clearly?
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Which means you depend on the environment to
see yourself.
Needleman: Well perhaps in the beginning.
Krishnamurti: The beginning is the first step and the last step.
Needleman: I don't agree.
Krishnamurti: Let's go into it a little bit. See what has happened.
I go with good men because in that ambience, in that atmosphere I
see myself more clearly, because they are good I see my idiocies.
Needleman: Sometimes it happens that way.
Krishnamurti: I am taking this.
Needleman: That is one example, right?
Krishnamurti: Or I am also good, therefore I live with them.
Then I don't need them.
Needleman: No we don't need them then. All right.
Krishnamurti: If I am good I don't need them. But if when I am
not good and come into their presence, then I can see myself
clearly. Then to see myself clearly I must have them. This is what
generally takes place. They become important, not my goodness.
This happens every day.

Needleman: But is there not such a thing as weaning the baby
by blackening the breast? It happens that I do need these men,
maybe in the beginning.
Krishnamurti: I am going to question it, I want to find out. First
of all, if I am good I don't need them. I am like those hills and birds
which have no need.
Needleman: Right. We can rule that out.
Krishnamurti: When I am not good I need their company,
because in their company I see myself clearly; I feel a breath of
freshness. Needleman: Or how bad I am.
Krishnamurti: The moment I have a horror of myself, in the
largest sense of the word, I am merely comparing myself with
them.
Needleman: No, not always. I can expose the image I have of
myself as a lie.
Krishnamurti: Now I am questioning whether you need them to
expose yourself as a liar.
Needleman: In principle, no.
Krishnamurti: No, not in principle. Either it is so, or it is not.
Needleman: That is the question.
Krishnamurti: Which means if I need them, then I am lost. Then
I will for ever hang on to them. Sir, this has happened since human
relationships began.
Needleman: Yes it has. But it also happens that I hang on for a
while and then I right it.
Krishnamurti: Therefore why don't you, the good man, tell me:
"Look, begin, you don't need me. You can watch yourself now
clearly."

Needleman: Maybe if I told you that, you would take it utterly
wrongly and misunderstand me completely!
Krishnamurti: Then what shall I do? Go on hanging onto you,
run after you?
Needleman: Not what shall you do, but what do you do?
Krishnamurti: What they generally do is run after him.
Needleman: They generally do, yes.
Krishnamurti: And hold on to his skirts.
Needleman: But that is perhaps because the teacher is not
intelligent.
Krishnamurti: No. He says, "Look, I can't teach you my friend, I
have nothing to teach. If I am really good I have nothing to teach. I
can only show." Needleman: But he doesn't say it, he does it.
Krishnamurti: I say, "Look I don't want to teach you, you can
learn from yourself."
Needleman: Yes, all right. Suppose he says that.
Krishnamurti: Yes, he says learn from yourself. Don't depend.
That means you, being good, are helping me to look at myself.
Needleman: Attracting you.
Krishnamurti: No. You are putting me in a corner so that I can't
escape.
Needleman: I see what you are saying. But it is the easiest thing
in the world to escape.
Krishnamurti: I don't want to. Sir, you tell me, "Don't depend,
for goodness has no dependency." If you want to be good you
cannot depend on anything.
Needleman: Anything external, yes all right.
Krishnamurti: On anything, external or inward. Don't depend on

anything. It doesn't mean just don't depend on the postman, it
means inwardly don't depend,
Needleman: Right.
Krishnamurti: That means what? I depend. He has told me one
thing: "Don't depend on me or on anybody, wife, husband,
daughter, politician, don't depend." That's all. He goes away. He
leaves me with that. What shall I do?
Needleman: Find out if he is right.
Krishnamurti: But I do depend.
Needleman: That's what I mean.
Krishnamurti: I do depend on my wife, on the priest, on some
psycho-analyst - I do depend. Then I begin. Because he tells me the
truth - you follow, Sir? It is there, I have to work it out. So I have
to find out if it is the truth, or if it is a falsehood. Which means I
must exercise my reason, my capacity, my intelligence. I must
work. I can't just say, "Well he has gone". I depend on my cook!
So I have to find out, I have to see the truth and the false. I have
seen it. That doesn't depend on anybody.
Needleman: Right.
Krishnamurti: Even the company of the good doesn't teach me
what is good and what is false, or true. I have to see it.
Needleman: Absolutely.
Krishnamurti: So I don't depend on anybody to find what is true
and what is false.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART II
CHAPTER 1 1ST PUBLIC TALK IN NEW YORK
18TH APRIL 1971 'INNER REVOLUTION'
Krishnamurti: We are going to examine together the question of
what is hidden in the consciousness, in the deeper layers of the
mind - which is generally called the unconscious. We are
concerned with bringing about a radical revolution in ourselves and
so in society. The physical revolution which is advocated all over
the world at the present time does not bring about a fundamental
change in man.
In a corrupt society, such as this, in Europe, India and
elsewhere, there must be fundamental changes in the very structure
of society. And if man remains corrupt in himself, in his activity,
he will overcome whatever the structure be, however perfect;
therefore it is imperative, absolutely essential that he change.
Is this change to be brought about through the process of time,
through gradual achievement, through gradual change? Or does the
change take place only in the instant? That is what we are going to
examine together.
One sees that there must be change in oneself - the more
sensitive, the more alert and intelligent one is, the more one is
aware that there must be a deep, abiding, living change. The
content of consciousness is consciousness - the two are not
separate. What is implanted in consciousness makes up
consciousness. And to bring about a change in consciousness both in the obvious and in the hidden - does it depend on analysis,
on time, on environmental pressure? Or is the change to take place

totally independent of any pressure, of any compulsion?
You know, this question is going to bc rather difficult to go
into, because it is quite complex and I hope we shall be able to
share what is being said. Unless one goes into this matter very
seriously, really taking trouble, with deep interest, with passion, I
am afraid one will not be able to go very far; far in the sense not of
time or space, but very deeply within oneself. One needs a great
deal of passion, great energy and most of us waste our energies in
conflict. And when we are examining this whole business of
existence, we need energy. Energy comes with the possibility of
change; if there is no possibility of change, then energy wastes
away.
We think we cannot possibly change. We accept things as they
are and thereby become rather dispirited, depressed, uncertain and
confused. It is possible to change radically and that is what we are
going to examine. If you will - do not follow exactly what the
speaker is saying, but use his words as a mirror to observe yourself
and enquire with passion, with interest, with vitality and a great
deal of energy. Then perhaps we can come to a point where it will
be obvious that without any kind of effort, without any kind of
motive, the radical change takes place.
There is not only the superficial knowledge of ourselves, but
there is also the deep, hidden content of our consciousness. How is
one to examine it, how is one to expose the whole content of it? Is
it to be done bit by bit, slowly gradually? - or is it to be exposed
totally and understood instantly, and thereby the whole analytical
process comes to an end?
Now we are going to go into this question of analysis. To the

speaker, analysis is the denial of action; action being always in the
active present. Action means not "having done" or "will do", but
doing. Analysis prevents that action in the present, because in
analysis there is involved time, a gradual peeling off, as it were,
layer after layer, and examining each layer, analysing the content
of each layer. And if the analysis is not perfect, complete, true,
then that analysis being incomplete, must leave a knowledge which
is not total. And the next analysis springs from that which is not
complete.
Look, I examine myself, analyse myself and if my analysis is
not complete, then what I have analysed becomes the knowledge
with which I proceed to analyse the next layer. So in that process
each analysis becomes incomplete and leads to further conflict, and
so to inaction. And in analysis there is the analyser and the
analysed, whether the analyser is the professional, or yourself, the
layman; there is this duality, the analyser analysing something
which he thinks is different from himself. But the analyser, what is
he? He is the past, he is the accumulated knowledge of all the
things he has analysed. And with that knowledge - which is the
past - he analyses the present.
So in that process there is conflict, there is the struggle to
conform, or to force that which he analyses. Also there is this
whole process of dreaming. I don't know whether you have gone
into all this yourself, or probably you have read other people's
books, which is most unfortunate; because then you merely repeat
what other people have said, however famous they are. But if you
don't read all those books - as the speaker does not - then you have
to investigate yourself, then it becomes much more fascinating,

much more original, much more direct and true.
In the process of analysis there is this world of dreams. We
accept dreams as necessary, because the professionals say, "You
must dream, otherwise you go mad", and there is some truth in
that. We are enquiring into all this because we are trying to find out
whether it is possible to change radically, when there is so much
confusion, so much misery, such hatred and brutality in the world;
there is no compassion. One must, if one is at all serious, enquire
into all this. We are enquiring not merely for intellectual
entertainment but actually trying to find out if it is possible to
change. And when we see the possibility of change, whatever we
are, however shallow, however superficial, repetitive, imitative, if
we see that there is a possibility of radical change, then we have
the energy to do so. If we say it is not possible, then that energy is
dissipated.
So we are enquiring into this question, whether analysis does
produce a radical change at all, or whether it is merely an
intellectual entertainment, an avoidance of action. As we were
saying, analysis implies entering into the world of dreams. What
are dreams, how do they come into being? I don't know if you have
gone into this; if you have, you will see that dreams are the
continuation of our daily life. What you are doing during the day,
all the mischief, the corruption, the hatred, the passing pleasures,
the ambition, the guilt and so on, all that is continued in the world
of dreams, only in symbols, in pictures and images. These pictures
and images have to be interpreted and all the fuss and unreality of
all that comes into being.
One never asks why should one dream at all. One has accepted

dreams as essential, as part of life. Now we are asking ourselves (if
you are with me) why we dream at all. Is it possible when you go
to sleep to have a mind that is completely quiet? Because it is only
in that quiet state that it renews itself, empties itself of all its
content, so that it is made fresh, young, decisive, not confused.
If dreams are the continuation of our daily life, of our daily
turmoil, anxiety, the desire for security, attachment, then
inevitably, dreams in their symbolic form must take place. That is
clear, isn't it? So one asks, "Why should one dream at all?" Can the
brain cells be quiet, not carry on all the business of the day?
One has to find that out experimentally, not accepting what the
speaker says - and for goodness sake don't ever do that, because we
are sharing together, investigating together. You can test it out by
being totally aware during the day, watching your thoughts, your
motives, your speech, the way you walk and talk. When you are so
aware there are the intimations of the unconscious, of the deeper
layers, because then you are exposing, inviting the hidden motives,
the anxieties, the content of the unconscious to come into the open.
So when you go to sleep, you will find that your mind, including
the brain, is extraordinarily quiet. It is really resting, because you
have finished what you have been doing during the day.
If you take stock of the day, as you go to bed and lie down don't you do this? - saying, "I should have done this, I should not
have done that", "It would have been better that way, I wish I
hadn't said this" - when you take stock of the things that have
happened during the day, then you are trying to bring about order
before you go to sleep. And if you don't make order before you go
to sleep, the brain tries to do it when you are asleep. Because the

brain functions perfectly only in order, not in disorder. It functions
most efficiently when there is complete order, whether that order is
neurotic or rational; because in neurosis, in imbalance, there is
order, and the brain accepts that order.
So, if you take stock of everything that has been happening
during the day before you go to sleep, then you are trying to bring
about order, and therefore the brain does not have to bring order
while you are asleep: you have done it during the day. You can
bring about that order every minute during the day, that is if you
are aware of everything that's happening, outwardly and inwardly.
Outwardly in the sense of being aware of the disorder about you,
the cruelty, the indifference, the callousness, the dirt, the squalor,
the quarrels, the politicians and their chicanery - all that is
happening. And your relationship with your husband, your wife,
with your girl or boyfriend, be aware of ill that during the day,
without correcting it, just be aware of it. The moment you try to
correct it, you are bringing disorder. But if you merely observe
actually what is, then what is, is order.
It is only when you try to change "what is" that there is
disorder; because you want to change according to the knowledge
which you have acquired. That knowledge is the past and you are
trying to change "what is" - which is not the past - according to
what you have learnt. Therefore there is a contradiction, therefore
there is a distortion, therefore this is disorder.
So during the day, if you are aware of the ways of your
thoughts, your motives, the hypocrisy, the double-talk - doing one
thing, saying another, thinking another - the mask that you put on,
the varieties of deception that one has so readily to hand, if you are

aware of all that during the day, you don't have to take stock at all
when you go to sleep, you are bringing order each minute. So when
you do go to sleep you will find that your brain cells, which have
recorded and hold the past, become totally quiet, and your sleep
then becomes something entirely different. When we use the word
"mind", we include in that the brain, the whole nervous organism,
the affections, all the human structure; we mean all that, not
something separate. In that is included the intellect, the heart, the
whole nervous organism. When you go to sleep then, the process
has totally come to an end, and when you wake up you see things
exactly as they are, not your interpretation of them or the desire to
change them.
So analysis, for the speaker, prevents action. And action is
absolutely essential in order to bring about this radical change. So
analysis is not the way. Don't accept, please, what the speaker is
saying, but observe it for yourself, learn about it, not from me, but
learn by watching all these implications of analysis: time, the
analyser and the analysed - the analyser is the analysed - and each
analysis must be complete, otherwise it distorts the next analysis.
So to see that the whole process of analyses, whether it is
introspective or intellectual analysis, is totally wrong! It is not the
way out - maybe it is necessary for those who are somewhat, or
greatly, unbalanced; and perhaps most of us are unbalanced.
We must find a way of observing the whole content of
consciousness without the analyser. It is great fun if you go into
this, because you have then rejected totally everything that man has
said. Because then you stand alone; when you find out for yourself,
it will be authentic, real, true, not dependent on any professor, any

psychologist, any analyst and so on.
So one must find a way of observing without analysis. I'm going
to go into that - I hope you don't mind my doing all this, do you?
This is not group therapy! (Laughter) This is not an open
confession, it is not that the speaker is analysing you, or making
you change and become marvellous human beings! You have to do
this yourself, and as most of us are secondhand or third-hand
human beings, it is going to be very difficult to put away totally all
that has been imposed on your minds by the professionals, whether
by religious or scientific professionals. We have to find out for
ourselves.
If analysis is not the way - and it is not, as far as the speaker is
concerned, as he has explained - then how is one to examine or to
observe the total content of consciousness? What is the content of
consciousness? Please don't repeat what somebody else has said.
What is your total content? Have you ever looked at it, considered
it? If you have, is it not the various recorded incidents, happenings,
pleasurable and non-pleasurable, various beliefs, traditions, the
various individual recollections and memories, the racial and
family memories, the culture in which one has been brought up all that is the content, isn't it? And the incidents that take place
every day, the memories, the various pains, the unhappiness, the
insults, all that is recorded. And that content is your consciousness
- you, as a Catholic, or Protestant, living in this western world with
the search for more and more and more, the world of great
pleasure, entertainment, wealth, incessant noise of the television,
the brutality - all that is you, that's your content.
How is all that to be exposed? - and in the exposing of it, is

each incident, each happening, each tradition, each hurt, each pain
to be examined one by one? Or is it to be looked at totally? If it is
to be examined bit by bit, one by one, you are entering into the
world of analysis and there is no end to that, you will die analysing
- and giving a great deal of money to those who analyse, if that's
your pleasure.
Now we're going to find out how to look at these various
fragments, which are the content of consciousness, totally - not
analytically. We are going to find out how to observe without any
analysis at all. That is, we have looked at everything - at the tree, at
the cloud, at the wife and the husband, at the girl and the boy - as
the observer and the observed. Please do give a little attention to
this. You have observed your anger, your greed or your jealousy,
whatever it is, as an observer looking at greed. The observer is
greed, but you have separated the observer because your mind is
conditioned to the analytical process; therefore you are always
looking at the tree, at the cloud, at everything in life as an observer
and the thing observed. Have you noticed it? You look at your wife
through the image which you have of her; that image is the
observer, it is the past, that image has been put together through
time. And the observer is the time, is the past, is the accumulated
knowledge of the various incidents, accidents, happenings,
experiences and so on. That observer is the past, and he looks at
the thing observed as though he were not of it, but separate from it.
Now can you look without the observer? Can you look at the
tree without the past as the observer? That is, when there is the
observer, then there is space between the observer and the
observed - the tree. That space is time, because there is a distance.

That time is the quality of the observer, who is the past, who is the
accumulated knowledge, who says, "That is the tree", or "That is
the image of my wife."
Can you look, not only at the tree, but at your wife or your
husband, without the image? You know, this requires tremendous
discipline. I am going to show you something: discipline generally
implies conformity, drill, imitation, conflict between what is and
what should be. And so in discipline there is conflict: suppressing,
overcoming, the exercise of will and so on - all that is implied in
that word. But that word means to learn - not to conform, not to
suppress, but to learn. And the quality of the mind that learns has
its own order which is discipline. We are learning now to observe,
without the observer, without the past, without the image. When
you so observe, the actual "what is", is a living thing, not a thing
looked upon as dead, recognizable by the past event, by past
knowledge.
Look, Sirs, let's make it much simpler than this. You say
something to me which hurts me, and the pain of that hurt is
recorded. The memory of that continues and when there is further
pain, it is recorded again. So the hurt is being strengthened from
childhood on. Whereas, if I observe it completely, when you say
something which is painful to me, then it is not recorded as a hurt.
The moment you record it as a hurt, that recording is continued and
for the rest of your life you are being hurt, because you are adding
to that hurt. Whereas to observe the pain completely without
recording it, is to give your total attention at the moment of the
pain. Are you doing all this?
Look, when you go out, when you walk in these streets, there

are all kinds of noise, all kinds of shouting, vulgarity, brutality, this
noise is pouring in. That is very destructive - the more sensitive
you are the more destructive it becomes, it hurts your organism.
You resist that hurt and therefore you build a wall. And when you
build a wall you are isolating yourself. Therefore you are
strengthening the isolation, by which you will get more and more
hurt. Whereas if you are observing that noise, are attentive to that
noise, then you will see that your organism is never hurt.
If you understand this one radical principle, you will have
understood something immense: that where there is an observer
separating himself from the thing he observes, there must be
conflict. Do what you will, as long as there is a division between
the observer and the observed, there must be conflict. As long as
there is division between the Muslim and the Hindu, between the
Catholic and the Protestant, between the Black and the White, there
must be conflict; you may tolerate each other, which is an
intellectual covering of intolerance.
As long as there is division between you and your wife, there
must be conflict. This division exists fundamentally, basically, as
long as there is the observer separate from the thing observed. As
long as I say, "Anger is different from me, I must control anger, I
must change, I must control my thoughts", in that there is division,
therefore there is conflict. Conflict implies suppression,
conformity, imitation, all that is involved in it. If you really see the
beauty of this, that the observer is the observed, that the two are
not separate, then you can observe the totality of consciousness
without analysis. Then you see the whole content of it instantly.
The observer is the thinker. We have given such tremendous

importance to the thinker, haven't we? We live by thought, we do
things by thought, we plan our life by thought, our action is
motivated by thought. And thought is worshipped throughout the
world as the most extraordinarily important thing, which is part of
the intellect.
And thought has separated itself as the thinker. The thinker
says, "These thoughts are no good", "These are better", he says,
"This ideal is better than that ideal", "This belief is better than that
belief". It is all the product of thought - thought which has made
itself separate, fragmented itself as the thinker, as the experiencer.
Thought has separated itself as the higher self and the lower self in India it is called the atman, the higher. Here you call it the soul,
or this or that. But it is still thought in operation. That's clear, isn't
it? I mean, this is logical, it is not irrational.
Now I am going to show you the irrationality of it. All our
books, all our literature, everything is thought. And our
relationship is based on thought - just think of it! My wife is the
image which I have created by thinking. That thinking has been put
together by nagging, by all the things which go on between
husband and wife - pleasure, sex, the irritations, the exclusions, all
the separative instincts that go on. Our thought is the result of our
relationship. Now what is thought? You are asked that question,
"What is thought?" Please don't repeat somebody else - find out for
yourself. Surely thought is the response of memory, isn't it? memory as knowledge, memory as experience which has been
accumulated, stored up in the brain cells. So the brain cells
themselves are the cells of memory. But if you did not think at all,
you would be in a state of amnesia, you would not be able to get to

your house.
Thought is the response of the accumulated memory as
knowledge, as experience - whether it is yours, or the inherited, the
communal experience and so on. So thought is the response of the
past, which may project itself into the future, going through the
present, modifying it as the future. But it is still the past. So
thought is never free - how can it be? It can imagine what is
freedom, it can idealize what freedom should be, create a Utopia of
freedom. But thought itself, in itself, is of the past and therefore it
is not free, it is always old. Please, it is not a question of your
agreeing with the speaker, it is a fact. Thought organises our life,
based on the past. That thought, based on the past, projects what
should be tomorrow and so there is conflict.
From that arises a question, which is, for most of us, thought
has given a great deal of pleasure. Pleasure is a guiding principle in
our life. We are not saying that it is wrong or right, we are
examining it. Pleasure is the thing that we want most. Here in this
world and in the spiritual world, in heaven - if you have a heaven we want pleasure in any form - religious entertainment, going to
Mass, all the circus that goes on in the name of religion. And the
pleasure of any incident, whether it is of a sunset, or sexual, or any
sensory pleasure, is recorded and thought over. So thought as
pleasure plays a tremendous part in our life. Something happened
yesterday which was a most lovely thing, a most happy event, it is
recorded; thought comes upon it, chews it and keeps on thinking
about it and wants it repeated tomorrow, whether it be sexual or
otherwise. So thought gives vitality to an incident that is over.
The very process of recording is knowledge, which is the past,

and thought is the past. So thought, as pleasure, is sustained. If you
have noticed, pleasure is always in the past; or the imagined
pleasure of tomorrow is still the recollection projected into the
future, from the past.
You can also observe that where there is pleasure and the
pursuit of pleasure, there is also the nourishing of fear. Haven't you
noticed it? Fear of the thing I have done yesterday, fear of the
physical pain which I had a week ago; thinking about it sustains the
fear. There is no ending of that pain when it's over. It is finished,
but I carry it over by thinking about it.
So thought sustains and gives nourishment to pleasure as well
as to fear. Thought is responsible for this. There is fear of the
present, of the future, fear of death, fear of the unknown, fear of
not fulfilling, fear of not being loved, wanting to be loved - there
are so many fears, all created by the machinery of thought. So there
is the rationality of thought and the irrationality of thought.
There must be the exercise of thought in doing things.
Technologically, in the office, when you cook, when you wash
dishes - knowledge must function perfectly. There is the
rationality, the logic of thought in action, in doing. But also
thought becomes totally irrational when it sustains pleasure or fear.
And yet thought says, "I cannot let go of my pleasure; yet thought
knows, if it is at all sensitive or aware, that there is pain coming
with it.
So to be aware of all the machinery of thought, of the
complicated, subtle movement of thought! This is really not at all
difficult once you say, "I must find out a way of living that is
totally different, a way of life in which there is no conflict." If that

is your real, your insistent, passionate demand - as is your demand
for pleasure - to live a life, inwardly and outwardly in which there
is no conflict whatsoever - then you will see the possibility of it.
Because, as we have explained, conflict exists only when there is
division between "me" and "not me". Then if you see that, not
verbally or intellectually - because that is not seeing - but when
you actually realize that there is no division between the observer
and the observed, between the thinker and the thought, then you
see, then you observe actually "what is". And when you see
actually "what is", you are already beyond it. You don't stay with
"what is", you stay with "what is" only when the observer is
different from the "what is". Are you getting this? So when there is
this complete cessation of division between the observer and the
observed, then "what is" is no longer what is. The mind has gone
beyond it.
Questioner: How can I change this identification of the observer
with the observed? I can't just agree with you and say " Yes, it's
true", but have to do something about it.
Krishnamurti: Quite right. Sir, there is no identification at all.
When you identify yourself with the observed, it is still the pattern
of thought, isn't it?
Questioner: Precisely, but how do I get out of that?
Krishnamurti: You don't get out of it, I'll show it to you, Sir. Do
you see the truth that the observer is the observed? - the fact of it,
the logic of it. Do you see that? Or don't you?
Questioner: It is still only a comment which arises; the truth
does not exist.
Krishnamurti: The fact does not exist?

Questioner: No, a comment of agreement arises.
Krishnamurti: But you see that fact, don't you? Don't agree or
disagree, this is a very serious thing; I wish I could talk about
meditation, but not now, for this is implied in it. Sir, see the
importance of this. The truth is that "I am anger" - not "I" am
different from anger. That is the truth, that is a fact, isn't it? I am
anger; not "I" separate from anger. When I am jealous, I am
jealousy; not "I" am different from jealousy. I make myself
separate from jealousy because I want to do something about it,
sustain it or get rid of it or rationalize it, whatever it is. But the fact
is, the "me" is jealous, isn't it?
Now how am I to act when I am jealous, when "me" is
jealousy? Before, I thought "I" could act when I separated myself
from jealousy, I thought I could do something about it, suppress it,
rationalize it, or run away from it - do various things. I thought I
was doing something. Here, I feel I am not doing anything. That is,
when I say "I am jealousy", I feel I can't move. Isn't that right, Sir?
Look at the two varieties of activity, at the action which takes
place when you are different from jealousy, which is the nonending of jealousy. You may run away from it, you may suppress
it, you may transcend it, you may escape, but it will come back, it
will be there always, because there is the division between you and
jealousy. Now there is a totally different kind of action when there
is no division, because in that the observer is the observed, he
cannot do anything about it. Before, he was able to do something
about it, now he feels he is powerless, he is frustrated, he can't do
anything. If the observer is the observed, then there is no saying, "I
can or can't do anything about it" - he is what he is. He is jealousy.

Now, when he is jealousy, what takes place? Go on, Sir!
Questioner: He understands...
Krishnamurti: Do look at it, take time. When I think I am
different from my jealousy, then I feel I can do something about it
and in the doing of it there is conflict. Here on the other hand,
when I realize the truth of it, that I am jealousy, that "I", the
observer, am the observed, then what takes place?
Questioner: There is no conflict.
Krishnamurti: The element of conflict ceases. There conflict
exists, here conflict does not exist. So conflict is jealousy. Have
you got it? There has been complete action, an action in which
there has been no effort at all, therefore it is complete, total, it will
never come back.
Questioner: You said analysis is the deadly tool to thought or
consciousness. I perfectly agree with you and you were about to
say that you would develop the argument that there are fragments
in the brain or in thought or in consciousness which will be antianalysis. I should be grateful, Sir, if you would continue to develop
that part of the argument.
Krishnamurti: Of what, Sir?
Questioner: You mentioned the fragments will not constitute
any conflict or struggle, they will be anti-analytical.
Krishnamurti: I just explained, Sir, there must be fragmentation
when there is the observer and the observed, as two different
things. Sir, look, this is not an argument, there is nothing to
develop. I have gone into it fairly thoroughly, we can spend of
course lots more time, because the more deeply you go into it the
more there is. We have broken up our life into many fragments,

haven't we? - the scientist, the businessman, the artist, the
housewife and so on. What is the basis, what is the root of this
fragmentation? The root of this fragmentation is the observer being
separate from the observed. He breaks up life: I am a Hindu and
you are a Catholic, I am a Communist, you are a bourgeois. So
there is this division going on all the time. And I say, "Why is there
this division, what causes this division?" - not only in the external,
economic, social structure, but much more deeply. This division is
brought about by the "me" and the "not me" - the me that wants to
be superior, famous, greater - whereas "you" are different.
So the "me" is the observer, the "me" is the past, which divides
the present as the past and the future. So as long as there is the
observer, the experiencer, the thinker, there must be division.
Where the observer is the observed, conflict ceases and therefore
jealousy ceases. Because jealousy is conflict, isn't it?
Questioner: Is jealousy human nature?
Krishnamurti: Is violence human nature? Is greed human
nature?
Questioner: I wanted to ask you another question, if I may. Am
I right or wrong, according to what you've been telling us, to say,
as a man thinketh in his heart, so is he? So we must watch our
thoughts and profit from experience.
Krishnamurti: That's just it. As you think, what you think, you
are. You think you are greater than somebody else, that you are
inferior to somebody else, that you are perfect, that you are
beautiful or not beautiful, that you are angry - what you think you
are. That's simple enough, isn't it? One has to find out whether it is
possible to live a life where thought has its rational function, and

see where thought becomes irrational. We'll go into that tomorrow.
Questioner: To continue with jealousy: when the jealousy is
"me", and "me" is the jealousy, the conflict ends, because I know
it's the jealousy and it disappears. But when I listen to the noises in
the street and the "me" is the noise, and the noises are "me", how
can conflict end when that noise will go on for ever.
Krishnamurti: It's fairly simple, Madam. I walk down the street
and that noise is terrible. And when I say that noise is "me", the
noise does not end, it goes on. Isn't that the question? But I don't
say the noise is me, I don't say the cloud is me, or the tree is me,
why should I say the noise is me? We pointed out just now, that if
you observe, if you say, "I listen to that noise", listen completely,
not with resistance, then that noise may go on for ever, it does not
affect you. The moment you resist, you are separate from the noise
- not identify yourself with the noise - I don't know if you see the
difference. The noise goes on, I can cut myself off from it by
resisting it, putting a wall between myself and that noise. Then
what takes place, when I resist something? There is conflict, isn't
there? Now can I listen to that noise without any resistance
whatsoever?
Questioner: Yes, if you know that the noise might stop in an
hour!
Krishnamurti: No that is still part of your resistance.
Questioner: That means that I can listen to the noise in the street
for the rest of my life with the possibility I might become deaf.
Krishnamurti: No, listen, Madam, I am saying something
entirely different. We are saying, as long as there is resistance,
there must be conflict. Whether I resist my wife, or my husband,

whether I resist the noise of a dog barking, or the noise in the
street, there must be conflict. Now, how is one to listen to the noise
without conflict - not whether it will go on indefinitely, or hoping
it will come to an end - but how to listen to the noise without any
conflict? That is what we are talking about. You can listen to the
noise when the mind is completely free of any form of resistance not only to that noise, but to everything in life - to your husband, to
your wife, to your children, to the politician. Therefore what takes
place? Your listening becomes much more acute, you become
much more sensitive, and therefore noise is only a part, it isn't the
whole world. The very act of listening is more important than the
noise, so listening becomes the important thing and not the noise.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART II
CHAPTER 2 2ND PUBLIC TALK IN NEW YORK
24TH APRIL 1971 'RELATIONSHIP'
Krishnamurti: I would like to talk about relationship, about what
love is, about human existence in which is involved our daily
living, the problems one has, the conflicts, the pleasures and the
fears, and that most extraordinary thing one calls death.
I think one has to understand, not as a theory, not as a
speculative, entertaining concept, but rather as an actual fact - that
we are the world and the world is us. The world is each one of us;
to feel that, to be really committed to it and to nothing else, brings
about a feeling of great responsibility and an action that must not
be fragmentary, but whole.
I think we are apt to forget that our society, the culture in which
we live, which has conditioned us, is the result of human
endeavour, conflict, human misery and suffering. Each one of us is
that culture; the community is each one of us - we are not separate
from it. To feel this, not as an intellectual idea or a concept, but to
actually feel the reality of this, one has to go into the question of
what is relationship; because our life, our existence, is based on
relationship. Life is a movement in relationship. If we do not
understand what is implied in relationship, we inevitably not only
isolate ourselves, but create a society in which human beings are
divided, not only nationally, religiously, but also in themselves and
therefore they project what they are into the outer world.
I do not know if you have gone into this question deeply for
yourself, to find out if one can live with another in total harmony,

in complete accord, so that there is no barrier, no division, but a
feeling of complete unity. Because relationship means to be related
- not in action, not in some project, not in an ideology - but to be
totally united in the sense that the division, the fragmentation
between individuals, between two human beings, does not exist at
all at any level.
Unless one finds this relationship, it seems to me that when we
try to bring order in the world, theoretically or technologically, we
are bound to create not only deep divisions between man and man,
but also we shall be unable to prevent corruption. Corruption
begins in the lack of relationship; I think that is the root of
corruption. Relationship as we know it now is the continuation of
division between individuals. The root meaning of that word
individual means "indivisible". A human being who is in himself
not divided, not fragmented, is really an individual. But most of us
are not individuals; we think we are, and therefore there is the
opposition of the individual to the community. One has to
understand not only the meaning of that word individuality in the
dictionary sense, but in that deep sense in which there is no
fragmentation at all. That means perfect harmony between the
mind, the heart and the physical organism. Only then an
individuality exists.
If we examine our present relationship with each other closely,
be it intimate or superficial, deep or passing, we see is fragmented.
Wife or husband, boy or girl, each lives in his own ambition, in
personal and egotistic pursuits, in his own cocoon. All these
contribute to the factor of bringing about an image in himself and
therefore his relationship with another is through that image,

therefore there is no actual relationship.
I do not know if you are aware of the structure and the nature of
this image that one has built around oneself and in oneself. Each
person is doing this all the time, and how can there be a
relationship with another, if there is that personal drive, envy,
competition, greed and all the rest of those things which are
sustained and exaggerated in modern society? How can there be
relationship with another, if each one of us is pursuing his own
personal achievement, his own personal success?
I do not know if one is at all aware of this. We are so conditioned that we accept it as the norm, as the pattern of life, that each
one must pursue his own particular idiosyncrasy or tendency, and
yet try to establish a relationship with another in spite of this. Isn't
that what we are all doing? You may be married and you go to the
office or to the factory; whatever you are doing during the whole of
the day, you pursue that. And your wife is in her house, with her
own troubles, with her own vanities, with all that happens. Where
is the relationship between those two human beings? Is it in bed, in
sex? Is a relationship so superficial, so limited, so circumscribed,
not in itself corruption?
One may ask: how then are you to live, if you do not go to the
office, pursue your own particular ambition, your own desire to
achieve and to attain? If one does not do any of this, what is one to
do? I think that is a wrong question altogether, don't you? Because
we are concerned, are we not, in bringing about a radical change in
the whole structure of the mind. The crisis is not in the outer world,
but in consciousness itself. And until we understand this crisis, not
superficially, not according to some philosopher, but actually

deeply understand it for ourselves by looking into it and examining
it, we shall not be able to bring about a change. We are concerned
with psychological revolution and this revolution can only take
place when there is the right kind of relationship between human
beings.
How is such a relationship to be brought about? The problem is
clear, isn't it? Please, share this problem with me, will you? It's
your problem, not my problem; it's your life, not my life, it's your
sorrow, your trouble, your anxiety, your guilt. This battle is one's
life. If you listen merely to a description, then you will find that
you are only, swimming on the surface and not resolving any
problem at all. It is actually your problem, and the speaker is
merely describing it - knowing that the description is not the
described. Let us share this problem together, which is: how can
human beings, you and I, find a right relationship in all this
turmoil, hatred, destruction, pollution, and among these terrible
things which are going on in the world?
To find that out, it seems to me, one must examine what is
taking place, see what actually "is". Not what we should like to
think it should be, or try to change our relationship to a future
concept, but actually observe what it is now. In observing the fact,
the truth, the actuality of it, there is a possibility of changing it. As
we said the other day, when there is a possibility then there is great
energy. What dissipates energy is the idea that it is not possible to
change.
So we must look at our relationship as it is actually now, every
day; and in observing what it is, we shall discover how to bring
about a change in that actuality. So we are describing what actually

is, which is: each one lives in his own world, in his world of
ambition, greed, fear, the desire to succeed and all the rest of it you know what is going on. If I am married, I have responsibilities,
children, and all the rest of it. I go to the office, or some place of
work, and we meet each other, husband and wife, boy and a girl, in
bed. And that's what we call love, leading separate lives, isolated,
building a wall of resistance round ourselves, pursuing a selfcentred activity; each one is seeking security psychologically, each
one is depending on the other for comfort, for pleasure, for
companionship; because each one is so deeply lonely, each
demands to be loved, to be cherished, each one is trying to
dominate the other.
You can see this for yourself, if you observe yourself. Is there
any kind of relationship at all? There is no relationship between
two human beings, though they may have children, a house,
actually they are not related. If they have a common project, that
project sustains them, holds them together, but that's not
relationship.
Realizing all this, one sees that if there is no relationship
between two human beings, then corruption begins - not in the
outward structure of society, in the outer phenomenon of pollution,
but inner pollution, corruption, destruction begins, when human
beings have actually no relationship at all, as you haven't. You may
hold the hand of another, kiss each other, sleep together, but
actually, when you observe very closely, is there any relationship
at all? To be related means not to be dependent on each other, not
to escape from your loneliness through another, not to try to find
comfort, companionship, through another. When you seek comfort

through another, are dependent and all the rest of it, can there be
any kind of relationship? Or are you then using each other? We are
not being cynical, but actually observing what is: that is not
cynicism. So to find out what it actually means to be related to
another, one must understand this question of loneliness, because
most of us are terribly lonely; the older we grow the more lonely
we become, especially in this country. Have you noticed the old
people, what they are like? Have you noticed their escapes, their
amusements? They have worked all their lives and they want to
escape into some kind of entertainment.
Seeing this, can we find a way of living in which we don't use
another? - psychologically, emotionally, not depend on another,
not use another as a means of escape from our own tortures, from
our own despairs, from our own loneliness.
To understand this is to understand what it means to be lonely.
Have you ever been lonely? Do you know what it means? - that
you have no relationship with another, are completely isolated.
You may be with your family, in a crowd, in the office, wherever
you are, when this complete sense of utter loneliness with its
despair suddenly comes upon you. Till you solve that completely,
your relationship becomes a means of escape and therefore it leads
to corruption, to misery. How is one to understand this loneliness,
this sense of complete isolation? To understand it, one has to look
at one's own life. Is not your every action a self-centred activity?
You may occasionally be charitable, generous, do something
without any motive - those are rare occasions. This despair can
never be dissolved through escape, but by observing it.
So we have come back to this question, which is: how to

observe? How to observe ourselves, so that in that observation
there is no conflict at all? Because conflict is corruption, is waste
of energy, it is the battle of our life, from the moment we are born
till we die. Is it possible to live without a single moment of
conflict? To do that, to find that out for ourselves, one has to learn
how to observe our whole movement. There is observation which
becomes harmonious, which is true, when the observer is not, but
only observation. We went into that the other day.
When there is no relationship can there be love? We talk about
it, and love, as we know it, is related to sex and pleasure, isn't it?
Some of you say "No". When you say "No", then you must be
without ambition, then there must be no competition, no division as you and me, we and they. There must be no division of
nationality, or the division brought about by belief, by knowledge.
Then, only, can you say you love. But for most people love is
related to sex and pleasure and all the travail that comes with it:
jealousy, envy, antagonism, you know what happens between man
and woman. When that relationship is not true, real, deep,
completely harmonious, then how can you have peace in the
world? How can there be an end to war?
So relationship is one of the most, or rather the most important
thing in life. That means that one has to understand what love is.
Surely, one comes upon it, strangely, without asking for it. When
you find out for yourself what love is not, then you know what love
is - not theoretically, not verbally - but when you realize actually
what it is not, which is: not to have a mind that is competitive,
ambitious, a mind that is striving, comparing, imitating; such a
mind cannot possibly love.

So can you, living in this world, live completely without
ambition, completely without ever comparing yourself with
another? Because the moment you compare, then there is conflict,
there is envy, there is the desire to achieve, to go beyond the other.
Can a mind and a heart that remembers the hurts, the insults, the
things that have made it insensitive and dull - can such a mind and
heart know what love is? Is love pleasure? And yet that is what we
are pursuing, consciously or unconsciously. Our gods are the result
of our pleasure. Our beliefs, our social structure, the morality of
society - which is essentially immoral - is the result of our pursuit
of pleasure. And when you say, "I love somebody", is it love? That
means: no separation, no domination, no self-centred activity. To
find out what it is, one must deny all this - deny it in the sense of
seeing the falseness of it. When you once see something as false which you have accepted as true, as natural, as human - then you
can never go back to it; when you see a dangerous snake, or a
dangerous animal, you never play with it, you never come near it.
Similarly, when you actually see that love is none of these things,
feel it, observe it, chew it, live with it, are totally committed to it,
then you will know what love is, what compassion is - which
means passion for everyone. We have no passion; we have lust, we
have pleasure. The root meaning of the word passion is sorrow. We
have all had sorrow of some kind or another, losing somebody, the
sorrow of self-pity, the sorrow of the human race, both collective
and personal. We know what sorrow is, the death of someone
whom you consider you have loved. When we remain with that
sorrow totally, without trying to rationalize it, without trying to
escape from it in any form through words or through action, when

you remain with it completely, without any movement of thought,
then you will find, out of that sorrow comes passion. That passion
has the quality of love, and love has no sorrow.
One has to understand this whole question of existence, the
conflicts, the battles: you know the life that one leads, so empty, so
meaningless. The intellectuals try to give it a meaning and we also
want to find significance to life, because life has no meaning as it
is lived. Has it? The constant struggle, the endless work, the
misery, the suffering, the travail that one goes through in life, all
that has actually no meaning - we go through it as a habit. But to
find out what the significance is, one must also understand the
significance of death; because living and dying go together, they
are not two separate things.
So one must enquire what it means to die, because that is part of
our living. Not something in the distant future, to be avoided, only
to be faced when one is desperately ill, in old age or in an accident,
or on a battlefield. As it is part of our daily life to live without a
single breath of conflict, so it is part of our life to find out what it
means to love. That is also part of our existence, and one must
understand it.
How do we understand what death is? When you are dying, at
the last moment, can you understand the way you have lived? - the
strains, the emotional struggles, the ambitions, the drive; you are
probably unconscious and that makes you incapable of clear
perception. Then there is the deterioration of the mind in old age
and all the rest of it. So one has to understand what death is now,
not tomorrow. As you observe, thought does not want to think
about it. It thinks about all the things it will do tomorrow - how to

make new inventions, better bathrooms, all the things that thought
can think about. But it does not want to think about death, because
it does not know what it means. Is the meaning of death to be
found through the process of thought? Please do share this. When
we share it, then we will begin to see the beauty of all this, but if
you sit there and let the speaker go on, merely listening to his
words, then we don't share together. Sharing together implies a
certain quality of care, attention, affection, love. Death is a
tremendous problem. The young people may say: why do you
bother about it? But it is part of their life, as it is part of their life to
understand celibacy. Don't just say, "Why do you talk about
celibacy, that's for the old fogeys, that's for the stupid monks."
What it means to be celibate has also been a problem for human
beings, that also is part of life.
Can the mind be completely chaste? Not being able to find out
how to live a chaste life, one takes vows of celibacy and goes
through tortures. That is not celibacy. Celibacy is something
entirely different. It is to have a mind that is free from all images,
from all knowledge; which means understanding the whole process
of pleasure and fear.
Similarly, one has to understand thus thing called death. How
do you proceed to understand something of which you are terribly
frightened? Aren't we frightened of death? Or we say, "Thank God
I'm going to die, I've had enough of this life with all the misery of
it, the confusion, the shoddiness, the brutality, the mechanical
things by which one is caught, thank God all this will end!" That is
not an answer; nor is it to rationalize death, or to believe in some
reincarnation, as the whole Asiatic world does. To find out what

reincarnation means, which is to be born in a future existence, you
must find out what you are now. If you believe in reincarnation,
what are you now? - a lot of words, a lot of experience, of
knowledge; you are conditioned by various cultures, you are all the
identifications of your life, your furniture, your house, your bank
account, your experiences of pleasure and pain. That's what you
are, aren't you? The remembrance of the failures, the hopes, the
despairs, all that you are now, and that is going to be born in the
next life - a lovely idea, isn't it!
Or you think there is a permanent soul, a permanent entity. Is
there anything permanent in you? The moment you say there is a
permanent soul, a permanent entity, that entity is the result of your
thinking, or the result of your hopes, because there is so much
insecurity, everything is transient, in a flux, in a movement. So
when you say there is something permanent, that permanency is
the result of your thinking. And thought is of the past, thought is
never free - it can invent anything it likes!
So if you believe in a future birth, then you must know that the
future is conditioned by the way you live now, what you do now,
what you think, what your acts are, your ethics. So what you are
now, what you do now, matters tremendously. But those people
who believe in a future birth don't give a pin about what happens
now, it's just a matter of belief.
So, how do you find out what death means, when you are living
with vitality, with energy, full of health? Not when you are
unbalanced, or ill, not at the last moment, but now, knowing the
organism must inevitably wear out, like every machinery.
Unfortunately we use our machinery so disrespectfully, don't we?

Knowing the physical organism comes to an end, have you ever
thought about what it means to die? You can't think about it. Have
you ever experimented to find out what it means to die
psychologically, inwardly? - not how to find immortality, because
eternity, that which is timeless, is now, not in some distant future.
To enquire into that, one must understand the whole problem of
time; not only chronological time, by the watch, but the time that
thought has invented as a gradual process of change.
How does one find out about this strange thing that we all have
to meet one day or another? Can you die psychologically today, die
to everything that you have known? For instance: to die to your
pleasure, to your attachment, your dependence, to end it without
arguing, without rationalizing, without trying to find ways and
means of avoiding it. Do you know what it means to die, not
physically, but psychologically, inwardly? Which means to put an
end to that which has continuity; to put an end to your ambition,
because that's what's going to happen when you die, isn't it? You
can't carry it over and sit next to God! (Laughter) When you
actually die, you have to end so many things without any
argument. You can't say to death, "Let me finish my job, let me
finish my book, all the things I have not done, let me heal the hurts
which I have given others" - you have no time.
So can you find out how to live a life now, today, in which there
is always an ending to everything that you began? Not in your
office of course, but inwardly to end all the knowledge that you
have gathered - knowledge being your experiences, your
memories, your hurts, the comparative way of living, comparing
yourself always with somebody else. To end all that every day, so

that the next day your mind is fresh and young. Such a mind can
never be hurt, and that is innocence.
One has to find out for oneself what it means to die; then there
is no fear, therefore every day is a new day - and I really mean this,
one can do this - so that your mind and your eyes see life as
something totally new. That is eternity. That is the quality of the
mind that has come upon this timeless state, because it has known
what it means to die every day to everything it has collected during
the day. Surely, in that there is love. Love is something totally new
every day, but pleasure is not, pleasure has continuity. Love is
always new and therefore it is its own eternity.
Do you want to ask any questions?
Questioner: Supposing, Sir, that through complete, objective,
self-observation I find that I am greedy, sensual, selfish and all
that. Then how can I know whether this kind of living is good or
bad, unless I have already some preconceptions of the good? If I
have these preconceptions, they can only derive from selfobservation.
Krishnamurti: Quite, Sir.
Questioner: I also find another difficulty. You seem to believe
in sharing, but at the same time you say that two lovers, or husband
and wife, cannot base their love, shouldn't base their love, on
comforting each other. I don't see anything wrong in comforting
each other - that is sharing.
Krishnamurti: The gentleman says, "One must have a concept
of the good, otherwise, why should one give up all this ambition,
greed, envy and all the rest of it?" You can have a formula or a
concept of what is better, but can you have a concept of what is

good?
Questioner: Yes, I think so.
Krishnamurti: Can thought produce what is good?
Questioner: No, I meant the conception of such good.
Krishnamurti: Yes Sir. The conception of good is the product of
thought; otherwise how can you conceive what is good?
Questioner: The conceptions can only be derived from our selfobservation.
Krishnamurti: I'm just pointing that out, Sir. Why should you
have a concept of the good at all?
Questioner: Otherwise how do I know whether my life is good
or bad?
Krishnamurti: Just listen to the question. Don't we know what
conflict is? Do I have to have a concept of non-conflict before I am
aware of conflict? I know what conflict is - the struggle, the pain.
Don't I know that, without knowing a state when there is no
conflict? When I formulate what is good, I will formulate it
according to my conditioning, according to my way of thinking,
feeling, my particular idiosyncrasy and all the rest of my cultural
conditioning. Is the good to be projected by thought? - and will
thought then tell me what is good and bad in my life? Or has
goodness nothing whatsoever to do with thought, or with a
formula? Where does goodness flower? - do tell me. In a concept?
In some idea, in some ideal that lies in the future? A concept means
a future, a tomorrow. It may be very far away, or very close, but it
is still in time. And when you have a concept, projected by thought
- thought being the response of memory, the response of
accumulated knowledge depending on the culture in which you

have lived - do you find that goodness in the future, created by
thought? Or do you find it when you begin to understand conflict,
pain and sorrow?
So in the understanding of "what is" - not by comparing "what
is" with "what should be" - in that understanding flowers goodness.
Surely, goodness has nothing whatsoever to do with thought - has
it? Has love got anything to do with thought? Can you cultivate
love by formulating it and saying "My ideal of love is that"? Do
you know what happens when you cultivate love? You are not
loving. You think you will have love at some future date; in the
meantime you are violent. So is goodness the product of thought?
Is love the product of experience, of knowledge? What was the
second question, Sir?
Questioner: The second question was about sharing.
Krishnamurti: What do you share? What are we sharing now? We
talked about death, we talked about love, about the necessity of
total revolution, about complete psychological change, not to live
in the old pattern of formulas, of struggle, pain, imitation,
conformity and all the rest of those things man has lived for
through millennia and has produced this marvellous, messy world!
We have talked about death. How do we share that together? share the understanding of it, not the verbal statement, not the
description, not the explanations of it? What does sharing mean? to share the understanding, to share the truth which comes with the
understanding. And what does understanding mean? You tell me
something which i serious, which is vital, which is relevant,
important, and I listen to it completely, because it is vital to me. To
listen vitally, my mind must be quiet, mustn't it? If I am chattering,

if I am looking somewhere else, if I am comparing what you are
saying with what I know, my mind is not quiet. It is only when my
mind is quiet and listens completely, that there is understanding of
the truth of the thing. That we share together, otherwise we can't
share; we can't share the words - we can only share the truth of
something. You and I can only see the truth of something when the
mind is totally committed to the observation.
To see the beauty of a sunset, the lovely hills, the shadows and
the moonlight - how do you share it with a friend? By telling him,
"Do look at that marvellous hill"? You may say it, but is that
sharing? When you actually share something with another, it
means you must both have the same intensity, at the same time, at
the same level. Otherwise you can't share, can you? You must both
have a common interest, at the same level, with the same passion otherwise how can you share something? You can share a piece of
bread - but that's not what we are talking about.
To see together - which is sharing together - we must both of us
see; not agree or disagree, but see together what actually is; not
interpret it according to my conditioning or your conditioning, but
see together what it is. And to see together one must be free to
observe, one must be free to listen. That means to have no
prejudice. Then only, with that quality of love, is there sharing.
Questioner: How can one quieten, or free the mind, from
interruptions by the past?
Krishnamurti: You cannot quieten the mind: full stop! Those are
tricks. You can take a pill and make the mind quiet - you
absolutely cannot make the mind quiet, because you are the mind.
You can't say, "I will make my mind quiet". Therefore one has to

understand what meditation is - actually, not what other people say
it is. One has to find out whether the mind can ever be quiet; not:
how to make the mind quiet. So one has to go into this whole
question of knowledge, and whether the mind, the brain cells,
which are loaded with all the past memories, can be absolutely
quiet and come into function when necessary; and when it is not
necessary, be completely and wholly quiet.
Questioner: Sir, when you speak of relationships, you speak
always of a man and a woman or a girl and a bay. Will the same
things you say about relationships also apply to a man and a man,
or a woman and a woman?
Krishnamurti : Homosexuality?
Questioner: If you wish to give it that name, Sir, yes.
Krishnamurti: You see, when we are talking of love, whether it
is of man and man, woman and woman, or man and woman, we are
not talking of a particular kind of relationship, we are talking about
the whole movement, the whole sense of relationship, not a
relationship with one, or two. Don't you know what it means to be
related to the world? - when you feel you are the world. Not as an
idea - that's appalling - but actually to feel that you are responsible,
that you are committed to this responsibility. That is the only
commitment; not to be committed through bombs, or committed to
a particular activity, but to feel that you are the world and the
world is you. Unless you change completely, radically, and bring
about a total mutation in yourself do what you will outwardly,
there will be no peace for man. If you feel that in your blood, then
your questions will be related entirely to the present and to
bringing about a change in the present, not to some speculative

ideals. Questioner: The last time we were together, you were
telling us that if someone has a painful experience and it is not
fully faced, or is avoided, it goes into the unconscious as a
fragment. How are we to free ourselves from these fragments of
painful and fearful experiences, so that the past won't have a grip
on us?
Krishnamurti: Yes, Sir, that is conditioning. How does one free
oneself from this conditioning? How do I free myself from my
conditioning of the culture in which I was born? First, I must be
aware that I am conditioned - not somebody telling me that I am
conditioned. You understand the difference? If somebody tells me I
am hungry, that's something different from actually being hungry.
So I must be aware of my conditioning, which means, I must be
aware of it not only superficially, but at the deeper levels. That is, I
must be aware totally. To be so aware, means that I am not trying
to go beyond the conditioning, not trying to be free of the
conditioning. I must see it as it actually is, not bring in another
element, such as: wanting to be free of it, because that is an escape
from actuality. I must be aware. What does that mean? To be aware
of my conditioning totally, not partially, means my mind must be
highly sensitive, mustn't it? Otherwise I can't be aware. To be
sensitive means to observe everything very, very closely - the
colours, the quality of people, all the things around me. I must also
be aware of what actually is without any choice. Can you do that? not trying to interpret it, not trying to change it, not trying to go
beyond it or trying to be free of it - just to be totally aware of it.
When you observe a tree, between you and the tree there is time
and space, isn't there? And there is also the botanical knowledge

about it, the distance between you and the tree - which is time - and
the separation which comes through knowledge of the tree. To look
at that tree without knowledge, without the time-quality, does not
mean identifying yourself with the tree, but to observe the tree so
attentively, that the boundaries of time don't come into it at all; the
boundaries of time come in only when you have knowledge about
the tree. Can you look at your wife, or your friend, or whatever it is
without the image? The image is the past, which has been put
together by thought, as nagging, bullying, dominating, as pleasure,
companionship and all that. It is the image that separates; it is the
image that creates distance and time. Look at that tree, or the
flower, the cloud, or the wife or the husband, without the image!
If you can do that, then you can observe your conditioning
totally; then you can look at it with a mind that is not spotted by
the past, and therefore the mind itself is free of conditioning.
To look at myself - as we generally do - I look as an observer
looking at the observed: myself as the observed and the observer
looking at it. The observer is the knowledge, is the past, is time, the
accumulated experiences - he separates himself from the thing
observed.
Now, to look without the observer! You do this when you are
completely attentive. Do you know what it means to be attentive?
Don't go to school to learn to be attentive! To be attentive means to
listen without any interpretation, without any judgement - just to
listen. When you are so listening there is no boundary, there is no
"you" listening. There is only a state of listening. So when you
observe your conditioning, the conditioning exists only in the
observer, not in the observed. When you look without the observer,

without the "me" - his fears, his anxieties and all the rest of it - then
you will see, you enter into a totally different dimension.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART II
CHAPTER 3 3RD PUBLIC TALK IN NEW YORK
25TH APRIL 1971 'RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE.
MEDITATION'
Krishnamurti: We said that we would talk over together a very
complex problem, which is: is there a religious experience, and
what are the implications of meditation? If one observes, it appears
that throughout the world man has always been seeking something
beyond his own death, beyond his own problems, something that
will be enduring, true and timeless. He has called it God, he has
given it many names; and most of us believe in something of that
kind, without ever actually experiencing it.
Various religions have promised that if you believe in certain
forms of rituals, dogmas, saviours, you might, if you lead a certain
kind of life, come upon this strange thing, whatever name one likes
to give to it. And those who have directly experienced it, have done
it according to their conditioning, to their belief to their
environmental and cultural influences.
Apparently religion has lost its meaning, because there have
been religious wars; religion does not answer all our problems,
religions have separated peoples. They have brought about some
kind of civilising influence, but they have not changed man
radically. When one begins to enquire if there is such a thing as
religious experience and what that experience is, why one calls it
"religious", obviously one must first have a great deal of honesty. It
is not to be honest according to a principle or a belief, or to some
form of commitment, but to honestly see things exactly as they are,

without any distortion, not only outwardly, but also inwardly:
never to deceive oneself. For deception is quite easy if one craves
for some kind of experience, call it religious or otherwise - if one
takes a trip and so on. Then you are bound to be caught in some
kind of illusion.
One has to find out for oneself, if one can, what religious
experience is. One needs a great sense of humility and honesty,
which means never to ask for experience, never to demand for
oneself a reality or an achievement. So one has to look very closely
at one's own desires, attachments and fears and understand them
wholly, if one can, so that the mind is in no way distorted, so that
there will be no illusion, no deception. And one has to ask also:
what does it mean to experience?
I do not know if you have gone into that question at all. Most of
us are bored with the usual experiences of every day. We are tired
of them all, and the more one is sophisticated, intellectual, the
more one wants to live only in the present - whatever that may
mean - and invent a philosophy of the present. The word
experience means to go through, to go right to the end and finish
with it. But unfortunately for most of us, every experience leaves a
scar, a memory, pleasant or unpleasant, and we want to retain only
the pleasant ones. When we are asking for any kind of spiritual,
religious, or transcendental experience, we must try to find out first
of all whether there is such an experience, and also what
experience itself means. If you experience something and you
cannot recognise it, then that experience ceases to be. One of the
essential meanings of experience is recognition. And when there is
recognition, it has already been known, has already been

experienced, otherwise you could not recognise it.
So when they talk about religious, spiritual, or transcendental
experience - that word is so misused - you must already have
known it, to be able to recognise that you are experiencing
something other than an ordinary experience. It seems logical and
true that the mind must be able to recognise the experience, and
recognition implies something you have already known, therefore
it is not new. When you want experience in the religious field, you
want it because you have not solved your problems, your daily
anxieties, despairs, fears and sorrows, therefore you want
something more. In that demand for more lies deception. That is
fairly logical and true, I think. Not that logic is always true, but
when one uses logic and reason healthily, sanely, one knows the
limitations of reason. The demand for wider, deeper, more
fundamental experiences only leads to a further extension of the
path of the known. I think that is clear, and I hope we are
communicating, sharing with each other.
Then also in this religious enquiry one is seeking to find out
what truth is, if there is a reality, if there is such a thing as a state
of mind that is beyond time. Search again implies a seeker - doesn't
it? And what is he seeking? How will he know that what he has
found in his search is true? Again, if he finds what is true - at least
what he thinks is true - that depends on his conditioning, on his
knowledge, on his past experiences; search then merely becomes a
further projection of his own past hopes, fears and longings.
A mind that is enquiring - not seeking - must be totally free of
these two, that is, of the demand for experience and the search for
truth. One can see why, because when you are seeking, you go to

various teachers, read various books, join various cults, follow
various gurus and all the rest of it, like window-shopping. Such a
search has no meaning whatsoever.
So when you are enquiring into this question, "What is a
religious mind, and what is the quality of mind that is no longer
experiencing anything at all?" - you must find out if the mind can
be free from the demand for experience and can completely end all
seeking. One has to investigate without any motive, without any
purpose, the facts of time and if there is a timeless state. To enquire
into that means to have no belief whatsoever, not to be committed
to any religion, to any so-called spiritual organization, not to
follow any guru, and therefore to have no authority whatsoever including that of the speaker especially. Because you are very
easily influenced, you are terribly gullible, though you may be
sophisticated, may know a great deal; but you are always eager,
always wanting, and therefore are gullible.
So a mind that is enquiring into the question of what is religion,
must be entirely free of any form of belief, any form of fear;
because fear, as we explained the other day, is a distorting factor,
bringing about violence and aggression. Therefore the mind that is
enquiring into the quality of the religious state and movement,
must be free of this. That demands great honesty and a great sense
of humility.
For most of us, vanity is one of the major impediments. Because
we think we know, because we have read a great deal, because we
have committed ourselves, have practised this or that system,
followed some guru peddling his philosophy, we think we know, at
least a little bit, and that's the beginning of vanity. When you are

enquiring into such an extraordinary question, there must be the
freedom of actually not knowing a thing about it. You really don't
know, do you? You don't know what truth is, what God is - if there
is such a thing - or what is a truly religious mind. You have read
about it, people have talked about it for millennia, have built
monasteries, but actually they are living on other people's
knowledge, experience and propaganda. To find out, surely one
must put aside all that completely, and therefore the enquiry into
all this is a very serious matter. If you want to play with it, there
are all kinds of so-called spiritual, religious entertainments, but
they have no value whatsoever to a serious mind.
To enquire into what is a religious mind, we must be free of our
conditioning, of our Christianity, of our Buddhism, with all the
propaganda of thousands of years, so that the mind is really free to
observe. That is very difficult because we are afraid to be alone, to
stand alone. We want security, both outwardly and inwardly;
therefore we depend on people, whether it is the priest, or the
leader, or the guru who says: "I have experienced, that is why I
know." One has to stand completely alone - not isolated. There is a
vast difference between isolation and being completely alone,
integral. Isolation is a state of mind in which relationship ceases,
when in your daily life and activity you have actually built a wall
around yourself, consciously or unconsciously, so as not to be hurt.
That isolation obviously prevents every form of relationship.
Aloneness implies a mind that does not depend on another
psychologically, is not attached to any person; which does not
mean that there is no love - love is not attachment. Aloneness
implies a mind that is deeply, inwardly without any sense of fear

and therefore without any sense of conflict.
If you go as far as that, then we can proceed to find out what
discipline means. For most of us discipline is a form of drill, of
repetition; either overcoming an obstacle, or resisting or
suppressing, controlling, shaping, conforming - all that is implied
in the word discipline. The root meaning of that word is to learn; a
mind that is willing to learn - not to conform - must be curious,
must have great interest, and a mind that already knows, cannot
possibly learn. So discipline means to learn why one controls, why
one suppresses, why there is fear, why one conforms, compares,
and is therefore in conflict. That very learning brings about order;
not order according to a design or pattern, but in the very enquiry
into the confusion, into the disorder, there is order. Most of us are
confused for a dozen reasons, which we needn't go into for the
moment. One has to learn about confusion, about the disorderly life
one leads; not try to bring order into the confusion, or into the
disorder, but to learn about it. Then, as you are learning, order
comes into being.
Order is a living thing, not mechanical, and order surely is
virtue. A mind that is confused, conforming, imitating, is not
orderly - it is in conflict. And a mind that is in conflict is disorderly
and therefore such a mind has no virtue. Out of this enquiry, out of
learning, comes order, and order is virtue. Please observe it in
yourself, see how disordered one is in one's life, so confused, so
mechanical. In that state one tries to find a moral way of living,
which will be orderly and sane. How can a mind that is confused,
conforming, imitative, have any kind of order, any kind of virtue?
The social morality, as you observe, is totally immoral; it may be

respectable, but what is respectable is generally disorderly.
Order is necessary, because only out of order can there be a
total action and action is life. But our action brings disorder; there
is political action, religious action, business action, family action they are fragmentary actions. And naturally such action is
contradictory. You are a businessman and at home you are a kindly
human being - at least you pretend to be; there is contradiction and
therefore there is disorder. A mind that is in disorder cannot
possibly understand what virtue is. And nowadays, when there is
permissiveness of every kind, virtue and order are denied. The
religious mind must have this order, not according to a pattern, or a
design laid down by you or by another. But that order, that sense of
moral rectitude, comes only when you understand the disorder, the
confusion, the mess that one lives in.
Now all this is to lay the foundation for meditation. If you don't
lay the foundations, meditation then becomes an escape. You can
play with that kind of meditation endlessly. And that is what most
people are doing - leading ordinary, confused, messy lives and
somehow finding a corner to bring about a quiet mind. And there
are all these people who promise to give you a quiet mind,
whatever that may mean.
So for a serious mind - and it is a very serious thing, not a game
- one must have this freedom from all belief, from all
commitments, because one is committed to the whole of life, not to
one fragment of it. Most of us are committed to physical or
political revolution, or to a religious activity, to some kind of
religious, monastic life and so on. Those are all fragmentary
commitments. We are talking of freedom, so that you can commit

your whole being, your whole energy, vitality and passion to the
whole of life, not to one part of it. Then we can proceed to find out
what it means to meditate.
I don't know if you have gone into this at all. Probably some of
you have played with it, have tried to control your thoughts,
followed various systems, but that is not meditation. One has to
dispose of the systems one has been offered: Zen, Transcendental
Meditation, the various things that have been brought over from
India and Asia, in which people are caught. One has to go into this
question of systems, of methods, and I hope you will; we are
sharing this problem together.
When you have a system to follow, what happens to the mind?
What do systems and methods imply - a guru? I don't know why
they call themselves gurus - I can't find a strong enough word to
deny that whole world of gurus, of their authority, because they
think they know. A man who says "I know", such a man does not
know. Or if a man says, "I have experienced truth", distrust him
completely. These are the people who offer systems. A system
implies practice, following, repetition, changing "what actually is"
and therefore increasing your conflict. Systems make the mind
mechanical, they don't give you freedom, they may promise
freedom at the end, but freedom is at the beginning, not at the end.
To enquire into the truth of any system, if you have no freedom at
the beginning, then you are bound to end up with a system and
therefore with a mind which is incapable of subtlety, swiftness and
sensitivity. So one can dispose entirely of all systems.
What is important is not controlling thought, but under, standing
it, understanding the origin, the beginning of thought, which is in

yourself. That is, the brain stores up memories - you can observe
this yourself, you don't have to read books about it. If it had not
stored up memories it would not be able to think at all. That
memory is the result of experience, of knowledge - yours, or of the
community, of the family, of the race and so on. Thought springs
from that storehouse of memory. So thought is never free, it is
always old, there is no such thing as freedom of thought. Thought
can never be free in itself, it can talk about freedom, but in itself it
is the result of past memories, experiences and knowledge;
therefore it is old. Yet one must have this accumulation of
knowledge, otherwise one could not function, one could not speak
to another, could not go home, and so on. Knowledge is essential.
In meditation one has to find out whether there is an end to
knowledge and so to freedom from the known. If meditation is a
continuation of knowledge, is the continuation of everything that
man has accumulated, then there is no freedom. There is freedom
only when there is an understanding of the function of knowledge
and therefore freedom from the known.
We are enquiring into the field of knowledge, where it has its
function and where it becomes an impediment to further enquiry.
While the brain cells continue to operate, they can only operate in
the field of knowledge. That is the only thing the brain can do, to
function in the field of experience, of knowledge in the field of
time - which is the past. Meditation is to find out if there is a field
which is not already contaminated by the known.
If I meditate and continue with what I have already learnt, with
what I already know, then I am living in the past, within the field
of my conditioning. In that there is no freedom. I may decorate the

prison in which I live, I may do all kinds of things in that prison,
but there is still a limitation, a barrier. So the mind has to find out
whether the brain cells, which have developed through millennia,
can be totally quiet, and respond to a dimension they do not know.
Which means, can the mind be totally still?
This has been the problem of all religious people throughout the
centuries; they realize that you must have a very quiet mind,
because then only can you see. If you are chattering, if your mind
is constantly in movement, rushing all over the place, obviously it
cannot look, it cannot listen totally. So they say, "Control it, hold
it, put it in a prison; they have not found a way of bringing about a
mind that is completely and utterly quiet. They say, "Don't yield to
any desire, don't look at a woman, don't look at the beautiful hills,
the trees and the beauty of the earth, because if you do, it might
remind you of a woman, or a man. Therefore control, hold on, and
concentrate." When you do all that, you are in conflict, and
therefore there has to be more control, more subjugation. This has
been going on for millennia, because they realize they must have a
quiet mind. Now, how does the mind become quiet? - without
effort, without control, without giving it a frontier? The moment
you ask "how" you are introducing a system. Therefore there is no
"how".
Can the mind become quiet? I don't know what you are going to
do about it when you see the problem, when you see the necessity,
the truth of having this delicate, subtle mind, which is absolutely
quiet. How is it to happen? This is the problem of meditation,
because only such a mind is a religious mind. It is only such a
mind that sees the whole of life as a unit, as a unitary movement,

not fragmented. Therefore such a mind acts totally, not
fragmentarily, because it acts out of complete stillness.
The foundation is a life of complete relationship, a life that is
orderly and therefore virtuous, a life that is extraordinarily simple
inwardly, and therefore totally austere - the austerity of deep
simplicity, which means that the mind is not in conflict. When you
have laid that foundation, easily, without any effort - because the
moment you introduce effort there is conflict - you see the truth of
it. Therefore it is the perception of "what is" that brings about a
radical change. It is only the still mind that understands that in a
quiet mind there is a movement that is totally different, that is of a
different dimension, of a different quality. That can never be put
into words, because it is indescribable. What can be described is
what comes up to this point, the point when you have laid the
foundation and seen the necessity, the truth, and the beauty of a
still mind.
For most of us, beauty is in something, in a building, in a cloud,
in the shape of a tree, in a beautiful face. Is beauty "out there", or is
it a quality of mind that has no self-centred activity? Because like
joy, the understanding of beauty is essential in meditation. Beauty
is really the total abandonment of the "me", and the eyes that have
abandoned the "me" can see the trees, the beauty of it all, and the
loveliness of the cloud; that happens when there is no centre as the
"me". It happens to each one of us, doesn't it? - when you see a
lovely mountain, when you come upon it suddenly, there it is!
Everything has been pushed aside except the majesty of that hill.
That mountain, that tree, absorbs you completely.
It is like a child with a toy - the toy absorbs the child, and when

the toy is destroyed the child is back again in whatever he is doing,
in his mischief, in his crying. Likewise with us: when you see the
mountain, or the single tree on a hill top, it absorbs you. And we
want to be absorbed by something, by an idea, by an activity, by a
commitment, by a belief, or we want to be absorbed by another;
which is like the child with a toy.
So beauty means sensitivity - a body that is sensitive, which
means the right diet, the right way of living, and you have all this,
if you have gone that far. I hope you will, or are doing it now; then
the mind will inevitably and naturally, unknowingly, become quiet.
You can't make the mind quiet, because you are the mischief
maker, you are yourself disturbed, anxious, confused - how can
you make the mind quiet? But when you understand what quietness
is, when you understand what confusion is, what sorrow is and
whether sorrow can ever end, and when you understand pleasure,
then out of that comes an extraordinarily quiet mind; you don't
have to seek it. You must begin at the beginning and the first step
is the last step, and this is meditation. Questioner: When you make
the analogy of the mountain, the hills, the beautiful sky - that's
wrong for these people, that's not the analogy for them - the
analogy is the dirt.
Krishnamurti: Right, take that - the analogy of the dirty streets
of New York, the analogy of squalor, poverty, the ghettos, the wars
to which each one of us has contributed. You don't feel that way,
because you have separated yourself, isolated yourself; therefore,
having no relationship with another, you become corrupt and allow
corruption to spread in the world. That's why this corruption, this
pollution, these wars, this hatred, cannot be stopped by a political

or religious system, or by any organization. You have to change.
Don't you see this? You have to cease completely to be what you
are. Not through will - meditation is the emptying of the mind of
will then a totally different action takes place.
Questioner: If one can have the privilege of becoming totally
aware, how can we then help those who are conditioned, who have
a deep resentment in them?
Krishnamurti: Why, if I may ask, do you use the word
privilege? What is there sacred or privileged about being aware?
That's a natural thing, isn't it, to be aware? If you are aware of your
own conditioning, of the turmoil, the dirt, the squalor, the war, the
hatred, if you are aware of all that, you will establish a relationship
with another so complete, that you are related to every other human
being in the world. You understand this? If I am related to
somebody completely, totally - not as an idea or an image - then I
am related to every human being in the world. Then I will see I
will not hurt another - they are hurting themselves. Then go,
preach, talk about it - not with the desire to help another, you
understand? - that's the most terrible thing to say, "I want to help
another". Who are you to help another? - including the speaker.
Sir, look, the beauty of the tree or the flower doesn't want to
help you, it is there; it is for you to look at the squalor or at the
beauty, and if you are incapable of looking at it, then find out why
you have become so indifferent, so callous, so shallow and empty.
If you find out that, then you are in a state where the waters of life
flow, you don't have to do anything. Questioner: What is the
relationship between seeing things exactly as they are and
consciousness?

Krishnamurti: You only know consciousness by its content, and
its content is what is happening in the world, of which you are a
part. To empty all that is not to have no consciousness, but a totally
different dimension. You cannot speculate about that dimension leave that to the scientists, to the philosophers. What we can do is
to find out whether it is possible to uncondition the mind by
becoming aware, by becoming totally attentive.
Questioner: I don't know myself what love is or what truth is, or
what God is, but you describe it as, "Love is God", instead of
"Love is love". Can you explain why you say "Love is God"?
Krishnamurti: I didn't say love is God.
Questioner: I read one of your books...
Krishnamurti: I'm sorry, don't read books! (Laughter) That word
has been used so much, is so loaded by man's despairs and hopes.
You have your God, the Communists have their gods. So find out,
if I may suggest, what love is. You can only find out what love is,
by knowing what it is not. Not knowing intellectually, but actually
in life putting aside what it is not - jealousy, ambition and greed,
all the division that goes on in life, the me and the you, we and
they, the black and the white. Unfortunately you won't do it
because it needs energy, and energy comes only when you observe
actually what is and don't run away from it. When you see actually
what is, then in the observing of it, you have the energy to go
beyond it. You cannot go beyond it if you are trying to escape from
it, to translate it, or to overcome it. Just observe actually what is,
then you have abundance of energy, then you can find out what
love is. Love is not pleasure, and to really find that out, inwardly,
for yourself, do you know what that means? It means that there is

no fear, that there is no attachment, no dependency, but a
relationship in which there is no division.
Questioner: Could you talk about the role of the artist in society
- does he serve a function beyond his own?
Krishnamurti: Who is an artist? Someone who paints a pic- ture,
writes a poem, who wants to express himself through painting or
through writing a book or a play? Why do we divide the artist from
the rest of us? - or the intellectual from the rest of us? We have
placed the intellectual at one level, the artist perhaps at a higher
level, and the scientist at a still higher level. And then we say,
"What is their role in society?" The question is not, what is their
role, but what is your role in society; because you have created this
mess. What is your role? Find out, Sir. That is, find out why you
live within this world of squalor, hatred and misery; apparently it
does not touch you.
Look, you have listened to these talks, shared some of the things
together, understood, let's hope, a great deal. Then you become a
centre of right relationship and therefore it is your responsibility to
change this terrible, corrupt, destructive society.
Questioner: Sir, could you go into psychological time.)
Krishnamurti: Time is old age, time is sorrow, time doesn't
heed. There is chronological time by the watch. That must exist,
otherwise you won't be able to catch your bus, cook a meal, and all
the rest of it. But there is another kind of time, which we have
accepted. That is, "Tomorrow I will be, tomorrow I will change,
tomorrow I will become; psychologically we have created time tomorrow. Is there a tomorrow, psychologically? That question
fills us with dread to ask seriously. Because we want tomorrow: "I

shall have the pleasure of meeting you tomorrow, I am going to
understand tomorrow, my life will be different tomorrow, I will
realize enlightenment tomorrow." Therefore tomorrow becomes
the most important thing in our life. You have had sex yesterday,
all the pleasures, all the agonies - whatever it is - and you want it
tomorrow, because you want that same pleasure repeated.
Put that question to yourself and find out the truth of it. "Is there
a tomorrow at all?" - except in thought which projects tomorrow.
So tomorrow is the invention of thought as time, and if there is no
tomorrow psychologically, what happens in life today? Then there
is a tremendous revolution, isn't there? Then your whole action
undergoes a radical change, doesn't it? Then you are completely
whole now, not projecting from the past, through the present, into
the future. That means to live, dying every day. Do it, and you will
find out what it means to live completely today. Isn't that what love
is? You don't say, "I will love tomorrow", do you? You love or you
don't love. Love has no time, only sorrow has time - sorrow being
thought, as in pleasure. So one has to find out for oneself what time
is, and find out if there is a "no tomorrow". That is to live, then
there is a life which is eternal, because eternity has no time.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
III CHAPTER 1 1ST CONVERSATION WITH
ALAIN NAUDE MALIBU CALIFORNIA 27TH
MARCH 1971 'THE CIRCUS OF MAN'S
STRUGGLE'
Naude: You speak about the whole of life. When we look about us
there is so much disorder everywhere; it seems that people are so
confused. In the world we see that there is war, ecological disorder,
political and social disorder, crime, and all the evils of
indusrialization and overpopulation. And it seems that the more
people try to solve these problems the more they augment. Then
there is man himself, who is full of problems. He has not only the
problems of the world about him, but is full of problems inwardly loneliness, despair, jealousy, anger - all this we may call confusion.
And presently he dies. Now we have always been told that there is
something else, which has variously been called God, eternity,
creation. And about this man knows nothing. He has tried to live
for this, in relation to this; but it has again made problems. It seems
from what you have said so many times that one must find a way
of dealing with these three sets of problems, these three aspects of
life at the same time, because these are the problems confronting
man. Is there a way to ask the question properly so that it will
answer these three sets of problems at the same time?
Krishnamurti: First of all, Sir, why do we make this division?
Or is there only one movement which must be taken on the wave
itself? So first let's find out why we have divided this whole
existence into the world outside of me, the world inside of me, and

something beyond me. Does this division exist because of the
chaos outwardly and are we only concerned with the outer chaos,
and totally neglect the inner chaos? Not finding a solution for the
outer, or for the inner, we then try to find a solution in a belief, in
the divine?
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So in asking a question of this kind, are we
dealing with the three things separately, or as a total movement?
Naude: How can we make them into a unitary movement? How
are they related? What is the action in man which will make them
the same?
Krishnamurti: I wouldn't come to that yet. I would ask: why has
man divided the world, his whole existence, into these three
categories? Why? - and from there move. Now why have I, as a
human being, divided the world outside of me from the world
inside me, and from the world which I am trying to grasp - of
which I know nothing - and to which I give all my despairing
hope?
Naude: Right.
Krishnamurti: Now why do I do this? Tentatively we are
asking: is it that we have not been able to solve the outer with its
chaos, confusion, destruction, brutality, violence and all the horrors
that are going on, and therefore we turn to the inner and hope
thereby to solve the outer? And not being able to solve the inner
chaos, the inner insufficiency, the inner brutality, violence and all
the rest of it, not being able to solve anything there either, then we
move away from both, the outer and the inner, to some other
dimension?

Naude: Yes, it is like that. That is what we do.
Krishnamurti: That is what is happening all the time around us
and in us.
Naude: Yes. There are the problems outside which engender the
problems inside. Not being able to deal with either, or both, we
create the hope of some other, some third state, which we call God.
Krishnamurti: Yes, an outside agency.
Naude: An outside agency which will be the consolation, the
final solution. But it is also a fact that there are things which are
really outer problems: the roof leaks, the sky is full of pollution,
the rivers are drying up, there are such problems. And there are
wars - they are visible outer problems. There are also problems
which we think to be inner problems, our secret and closed
longings, fears and worries.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Naude: There is the world, and there is man's reaction to it,
man's living in it. And so there are these two entities - at least in a
practical sort of way we can say there are. And so probably the
trying to solve practical problems overflows into the inner state of
man and engenders problems there.
Krishnamurti: That means we are still keeping the outer and the
inner as two separate movements.
Naude: Yes, we are. We do.
Krishnamurti: And I feel that is a totally wrong approach. The
roof does leak and the world is overpopulated, there is pollution,
there are wars, there is every kind of mischief going on. And not
being able to solve that we turn inward; not being able to solve the
inward issues we turn to something outer, still further away from

all this. Whereas if we could treat the whole of this existence as
one unitary movement, then perhaps we would be able to solve all
these problems intelligently and reasonably and in order.
Naude: Yes. It seems that is what you speak about. Would you
mind telling us how these three problems are really one thing?
Krishnamurti: I am coming to that, I am coming to it. The world
outside of me is created by me - not the trees, not the clouds, the
bees and the beauty of the landscape - but human existence in
relationship, which is called society, that is created by you and by
me. So the world is me and I am the world. I think that is the first
thing that must be established: not as an intellectual or an abstract
fact, but in actual feeling, in actual realization. This is a fact, not a
supposition, not an intellectual concept, but it is a fact that the
world is me and I am the world. The world being the society in
which I live, with its culture, morality, inequality, all the chaos that
is going on in society, that is myself in action. And the culture is
what I have created and what I am caught in. I think that is an
irrevocable and an absolute fact.
Naude: Yes. How is it that people don't see this enough? We
have politicians, we have ecologists, we have economists, we have
soldiers all trying to solve the outside problems simply as outer
problems.
Krishnamurti: Probably because of a lack of the right kind of
education: specialization, the desire to conquer and go to the moon
and play golf there, and so on and so on! We always want to alter
the outer hoping thereby to change the inner. "Create the right
environment" - the communists have said it a hundred times - "then
the human mind will change according to that."

Naude: That is what they say. In fact, every great university,
with all its departments, with all its specialists, one could almost
say that these great universities are founded and built on the belief
that the world can be changed by a certain amount of specialized
knowledge in different departments.
Krishnamurti: Yes. I think we miss this basic thing, which is:
the world is me and I am the world. I think that feeling, not as an
idea, that feeling brings a totally different way of looking at this
whole problem.
Naude: It is an enormous revolution. To see the problem as one
problem, the problem of man and not the problem of his
environment, that is an enormous step, which people will not take.
Krishnamurti: People won't take any step. They are used to this
outward organization and disregard totally what is happening
inwardly. So when one realizes that the world is me and I am the
world, then my action is not separative, is not the individual
opposed to the community; nor the importance of the individual
and his salvation. When one realizes that the world is me and I am
the world, then whatever action takes place, whatever change takes
place, that will change the whole of the consciousness of man.
Naude: Would you like to explain that? Krishnamurti: I, as a
human being, realize that the world is me and I am the world:
realize, feel deeply committed, am passionately aware of this fact.
Naude: Yes, that my action is in fact the world; my behaviour is
the only world there is, because the events in the world are
behaviour. And behaviour is the inner. So the inner and the outer
are one because the events of history, the events of life, are in fact
this point of contact between the inner and the outer. It is in fact

the behaviour of man.
Krishnamurti: So the consciousness of the world is my
consciousness.
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: My consciousness is the world. Now the crisis is
in this consciousness, not in organization, not in bettering the roads
- tearing down the hills to build more roads.
Naude: Bigger tanks, intercontinental missiles.
Krishnamurti: My consciousness is the world and the
consciousness of the world is me. When there is a change in this
consciousness it affects the whole consciousness of the world. I
don't know if you see that?
Naude: It is an extraordinary fact.
Krishnamurti: It is a fact.
Naude: It is consciousness that is in disorder; there is no
disorder anywhere else.
Krishnamurti: Obviously!
Naude: Therefore the ills of the world are the ills of human
consciousness, and the ills of human consciousness are my ills, my
malady, my disorder.
Krishnamurti: Now when I realize that my consciousness is the
consciousness of the world, and the consciousness of the world is
me, whatever change that takes place in me affects the whole of
consciousness.
Naude: To this people always say: that's all very well, I may
change, but there will still be a war in Indo-China! Krishnamurti:
Quite right, there will be.
Naude: And ghettos and overpopulation.

Krishnamurti: Of course, there will be. But if each one of us
saw the truth of this, that the consciousness of the world is mine,
and mine is the world's; and if each one of us felt the responsibility
of that - the politician, the scientist, the engineer, the bureaucrat,
the business man - if everybody felt that, what then? And it is our
job to make them feel this; that is the function of the religious man,
surely?
Naude: This is an enormous thing.
Krishnamurti: Wait, let me go on. So then it is one movement. It
is not an individual movement and his salvation. It is the salvation,
if you like to use that word, of the whole of man's consciousness.
Naude: The wholeness, and the health of consciousness itself,
which is one thing and in which is contained what appears to be the
outer, and what appears to be the inner.
Krishnamurti: That's right. Let's keep to that one point.
Naude: So what you are speaking about is in fact that health,
that sanity, and that wholeness of consciousness, which always has
been in fact an indivisible entity.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that's right. Now when the people who want
to create a different kind of world, the educators, the writers, the
organisers, when they realize the world as it is now is their
responsibility, then the whole of the consciousness of man begins
to change. Which is what is happening in another direction, only
they are emphasizing organization, division; they are doing exactly
the same thing.
Naude: In a negative way.
Krishnamurti: In a destructive way. So from that the question
arises: can this human consciousness, which is me - which is the

community, which is the society, which is the culture, which is all
the horrors that are produced by me in the context of the society, in
the culture which is me - can this consciousness undergo a radical
change? That is the question. Not escape into the supposed divine,
not escape. Because when we understand this change in
consciousness the divine is there, you don't have to seek it.
Naude: Would you please explain what this change in
consciousness consists of?
Krishnamurti: That's what we are going to talk about now.
Naude: And then perhaps we can ask about the divine if it
arises.
Krishnamurti: (Pause) First of all, is there any possibility of a
change in consciousness? Or is any change made consciously no
change at all? To talk about a change in consciousness implies
changing from this to that.
Naude: And both this and that are within consciousness.
Krishnamurti: That is what I want to establish first. That when
we say there must be a change in consciousness, it is still within
the field of consciousness.
Naude: The way we see the trouble, and the way we see the
solution, which we call change - that is all within the same area.
Krishnamurti: All within the same area and therefore no change
at all. That is, the content of consciousness is consciousness and
the two are not separate. Let's be clear on that point too.
Consciousness is made up of all the things that have been collected
by man as experience, as knowledge, as misery, confusion,
destruction, violence - all that is consciousness.
Naude: Plus so-called solutions.

Krishnamurti: God, no-God, various theories about God, all that
is consciousness. When we talk about change in consciousness we
are still changing the pieces from one corner to the other.
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Moving one quality into another corner of the
field.
Naude: Juggling with the contents of this huge box.
Krishnamurti: Yes, juggling with the contents. And therefore...
Naude: We are changing variables in the same set of things.
Krishnamurti: That's right. You have put it perfectly, better than
I have. When we talk about changing, we are really thinking of
juggling with the contents - right? Now that implies a juggler and
the thing with which he is juggling. But it is still within the field of
consciousness.
Naude: There are two questions which arise. Are you saying
that there is no consciousness at all outside of the content of
consciousness? And secondly, that there is no entity at all to juggle
there is no entity called `me' outside of this content of
consciousness?
Krishnamurti: Obviously not.
Naude: These are two big statements, Sir. Would you be kind
enough to explain them?
Krishnamurti: What is the first question?
Naude: The first thing you are saying, if I have understood
correctly, is: that this consciousness which we are discussing,
which is all we are and all we have, and which we have seen is the
problem itself, you are saying that this consciousness is its very
content, and that there is nothing to be called consciousness outside

of the content of consciousness?
Krishnamurti: Absolutely right.
Naude: Are you saying, outside of man's problems, outside of
his misery, outside of his thinking, outside of the formulations of
his mind, there is nothing at all we call consciousness?
Krishnamurti: Absolutely right.
Naude: This is a big statement. Would you explain this? We all
think - and this has been postulated by Indian religions since the
beginning of time - that there is a super-consciousness outside of
this shell which is the consciousness we are talking about.
Krishnamurti: To find out if there is something beyond this
consciousness, I must understand the content of this consciousness. The mind must go beyond itself. Then I shall find out if there
is something other than this or not. But to stipulate that there is has
no meaning, it is just a speculation.
Naude: So are you saying that what we commonly call
consciousness, and what we are talking about, is the very content
oF this consciousness? The container and contained are an
indivisible thing?
Krishnamurti: That's right.
Naude: And the second point you are making is: that there is no
entity to decide, to will, and to juggle, when the contents to be
juggled are absent.
Krishnamurti: That is, my consciousness is the consciousness of
the world, and the consciousness of the world is me. This is a truth,
not just my invention or dependent on your acceptance. It is an
absolute truth. Also the content is consciousness: without the
content there is no consciousness. Now when we want to change

the content we are juggling.
Naude: The content is juggling itself, because you have a third
point, that there is nobody outside of this content to do any
juggling at all.
Krishnamurti: Quite right.
Naude: So the juggler and the content are one, and the container
and the content are one.
Krishnamurti: The thinker who within this consciousness says
that he must change, is consciousness trying to change. I think that
is fairly clear.
Naude: So that the world, the consciousness and the entity who
supposedly will change it, are all the same entity, masquerading, as
it were in three different roles.
Krishnamurti: If that is so, then what is a human being to do to
bring about a total emptying of the content of consciousness? How
is this particular consciousness, which is me and the world with all
its miseries, how is that to undergo complete change? How is the
mind - which is consciousness, with all its content, with the
accumulated knowledge of the past - how is that mind to empty
itself of all its content?
Naude: But people will say, hearing what you have said,
understanding it imperfectly, they will say: can that consciousness
be emptied, and when that consciousness is emptied, supposing
this were possible, doesn't that reduce one to a state of considerable
vagueness and inertia?
Krishnamurti: On the contrary. To have come to this point
requires a great deal of enquiry, a great deal of reason, logic, and
with it comes intelligence.

Naude: Because some people may think that the empty
consciousness, which you speak about, is something like the
consciousness of the child at birth.
Krishnamurti: No, Sir, not at all. Let's go slowly at this, step by
step. Let's begin again. My consciousness is the consciousness of
the world. The world is me and the content of my consciousness is
the content of the world. The content of consciousness is
consciousness itself.
Naude: And also that is the entity who says he is conscious.
Krishnamurti: Now I am asking myself, realizing I am that,
what is then changed?
Naude: What is changed which will solve these three sets of
problems that are really one?
Krishnamurti: What is implied by change? What is implied by
revolution? - not physical revolution.
Naude: We have gone beyond that.
Krishnamurti: Physical revolution is the most absurd, primitive,
unintelligent destruction.
Naude: It is fragmentation in this consciousness.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Naude: Are you asking what it is which will restore order to this
consciousness? - an order which is whole.
Krishnamurti: Can there be order within this consciousness?
Naude: Is that the next step?
Krishnamurti: That is what you are asking.
Naude: Yes. Since we see that the disorder, which is the sorrow
and the suffering, is the disorder in this indivisible consciousness,
the next question must be: what are we going to do about it?

Krishnamurti: Yes.
Naude: And since there is no entity who can do something
about it...
Krishnamurti: Wait, don't jump to that immediately.
Naude: Because we have seen that the disorder is the entity.
Krishnamurti: Do we realize that? No. Do we realize that the
thinker is part of this consciousness and is not a separate entity
outside this consciousness? Do we realize that the observer, seeing
the content, examining, analysing, looking at it all, is the content
itself? That the observer is the content?
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: But stating a truth is one thing, the realization of
it is another.
Naude: That's right. I think we do not fully understand that there
is no entity separate from this thing we are trying to change.
Krishnamurti: When we talk of change it seems to imply that
there is an entity separate within the consciousness, who can bring
about a transformation.
Naude: We think that somehow we can step aside from the mess
and look at it and juggle with it. We always tell ourselves, "Well,
I'm still here to do something about it." And so we juggle more and
more.
Krishnamurti: More mess, more confusion.
Naude: A change of decor and things get worse.
Krishnamurti: The consciousness of the world is my
consciousness. In that consciousness is all the content of human
endeavour, human misery, human cruelty, mischief, all human
activities are within that consciousness. Within that consciousness

man has brought about this entity which says, "I am separate from
my consciousness." The observer there says, "I am different from
the thing observed." The thinker says, "My thoughts are different
from me." First, is that so?
Naude: We all believe that the two entities are different. We say
to ourselves, "I must not be angry, I must not be sorrowful, I must
improve, I must change myself." We are saying this either tacitly
or consciously all the time.
Krishnamurti: Because we think these two are separate. Now
we are trying to point out that they are not separate, that they are
one, because if there is no thought at all there is no thinker.
Naude: That is right.
Krishnamurti: If there is nothing observed there is no observer.
Naude: There are a hundred observers and a hundred thinkers
during the course of the day.
Krishnamurti: I am just saying: is that so? I observe that redtailed hawk flying by. I see it. When I observe that bird, am I
observing with the image I have about that bird, or am I merely
observing? Is there only mere observation? If there is an image,
which is words, memory and all the rest of it, then there is an
observer watching the bird go by. If there is only observation, then
there is no observer.
Naude: Would you explain why there is an observer when I
look at the bird with an image?
Krishnamurti: Because the observer is the past. The observer is
the censor, is the accumulated knowledge, experience, memory;
that is the observer, with that he observes the world. His
accumulated knowledge is different from your accumulated

knowledge.
Naude: Are you saying that this total consciousness which is the
problem, is not different from the observer who is going to deal
with it, and this would seem to bring us to a deadlock, because the
thing we are trying to change is the person trying to change it? And
the question is: what then?
Krishnamurti: That is just it. If the observer is the observed,
what is the nature of change in consciousness? That is what we are
trying to find out. We realize that there must be a radical revolution
in consciousness. How is this to take place? Is it to take place
through the observer? When the observer is separate from the
observed, then this change is merely juggling with the various
contents of consciousness.
Naude: That's right.
Krishnamurti: Now let's go slowly. One realizes that the
observer is the observed, the thinker is the thought, that is a fact.
Let's stop there a minute.
Naude: Are you saying that the thinker is the totality of all these
thoughts which create the confusion?
Krishnamurti: The thinker is the thought, whether it is many, or
one.
Naude: But there is a difference, because the thinker thinks of
himself as some sort of crystallized concrete entity. Even through
this discussion, the thinker sees himself as the concrete entity to
whom all these thoughts, all this confusion belongs.
Krishnamurti: That concrete entity, as you say, is the result of
thought.
Naude: That concrete entity is...

Krishnamurti: ...put together by thought.
Naude: Put together by his thoughts.
Krishnamurti: By thought, not "his", by thought.
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: And thought sees that there must be a change.
This concrete entity, which is the result of thought, hopes to
change the content.
Naude: Itself.
Krishnamurti: And so there is a battle between the observer and
the observed. The battle consists of trying to control, change,
shape, suppress, give a new shape, all that, that is the battle that
goes on all the time in our life. But when the mind understands the
truth that the observer, the experiencer, the thinker, is the thought,
is the experience, is the observed, then what takes place? knowing that there must be a radical change.
Naude: That is a fact.
Krishnamurti: And when the observer, who wants to change,
realizes he is part of what has to be changed?
Naude: That he is in fact a thief pretending to be a policeman to
catch himself.
Krishnamurti: Right. So what takes place?
Naude: You see, Sir, people don't believe this; they say, "By
exercising will I have stopped smoking, by exercising will I have
got up earlier, I have lost weight and I have learnt languages; they
say, "I am the master of my destiny, I can change" - everybody
really believes this. Everybody believes that he is capable
somehow of exercising will upon his own life, upon his own
behaviour, and his own thinking.

Krishnamurti: Which means, one has to understand the meaning
of effort. What it is, why effort exists at all. Is that the way to bring
about a transformation in consciousness? Through effort, through
will?
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Which means what? Change through conflict.
When there is the operation of will, it is a form of resistance; to
overcome, to suppress, to deny, to escape - all that is will in action.
That means life is then a constant battle.
Naude: Are you saying that simply one element in this
consciousness is dominating another?
Krishnamurti: Obviously. One fragment dominates another
fragment.
Naude: And that there is still conflict? There is still disorder by
that very fact. Yes, this is clear. Krishnamurti: So, the central fact
still remains. There must be a radical transformation in
consciousness and of consciousness. Now, how is this to be
brought about? That is the real question.
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: We have approached it by thinking that one
fragment is superior to the rest, to the other fragments within the
field of consciousness.
Naude: Indeed we have.
Krishnamurti: Now that fragment which we call superior,
intelligence, intellect, reason, logic, is the product of the many
other fragments. One fragment has assumed authority over other
fragments. But it is still a fragment and therefore there is a battle
between it and the many other fragments. So is it possible to see

that this fragmentation does not solve our problems?
Naude: Because it causes the division and the conflict, which
right from the start was our problem.
Krishnamurti: That is, when there is division between man and
woman there is conflict. When there is a division between
Germany and England or Russia, there is conflict.
Naude: And all this is division within consciousness itself. Also,
the exercise of will upon consciousness is again a division within
consciousness.
Krishnamurti: So one has to be free of the idea that through will
you can change the content. That is important to understand.
Naude: Yes, that the exercise of will is simply the tyranny of
one fragment over another.
Krishnamurti: That's simple. One also realizes that to be free of
will is to be free of this fragmentation.
Naude: But religions in the world have always called upon will
to come in and do something.
Krishnamurti: Yes. But we are denying the whole of that.
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So what is a mind to do, or not to do, when it
sees will is not the way, when it sees that one fragment taking
charge over another fragment is still fragmentation and therefore
conflict? - and therefore still within the field of misery. Then what
is such a mind to do?
Naude: Yes, this is really the question.
Krishnamurti: Now, for such a mind is there anything to do?
Naude: When you say that, one says, "If there is nothing to do
then the circus goes on."

Krishnamurti: No, Sir. Look! The circus goes on only when
there is the exercise of will.
Naude: Are you saying that the circus that we have been
discussing and trying to change, is in fact made up of will?
Krishnamurti: My will against your will, and so on.
Naude: My will against another part of me.
Krishnamurti: And so on.
Naude: My desire to smoke...
Krishnamurti: That's just it. A mind which starts by saying, "I
must change," realizes that one fragment asserting it must change
is still in conflict with another fragment, which is part of
consciousness. It realizes that. Therefore it also realizes that will,
to which man has become accustomed, which he takes for granted
is the only way to bring about change...
Naude:...is not the factor of change.
Krishnamurti: Is not the factor of change. Therefore such a
mind has come to quite a different height.
Naude: It has cleared up a great deal.
Krishnamurti: A vast quantity of rubbish.
Naude: It has cleared up the division between the inner and the
outer; the division between consciousness and its content. It has
cleared up also the division between the conscious entity and the
consciousness belonging to him and the various fragments. And it
has cleared up the division between different fragments in that
consciousness.
Krishnamurti: So what has happened? What has happened to the
mind that has seen all this? Not theoretically but actually felt it and
says, "No more will in my life". Which means no more resistance

in my life.
Naude: This is so extraordinary it is like finding the sky at the
bottom, one day. It is such a great change, it is difficult to say what
the extent of that change is.
Krishnamurti: It has already taken place! That is my point.
Naude: You are saying that there is no more will, there is no
more effort, there is no more division between the outside and the
inside...
Krishnamurti: ...no more fragmentation within consciousness.
Naude: No more fragmentation.
Krishnamurti: That is very important to understand, Sir.
Naude: No more observer separate from what he has observed.
Krishnamurti: Which means what? No fragmentation within
consciousness. Which means consciousness only exists when there
is conflict between fragments.
Naude: I am not sure that I have understood that. Consciousess
is its fragments?
Krishnamurti: Consciousness is its fragments and consciousness
is the battle between the fragments.
Naude: Are you saying that there are only fragments because
they are in conflict, in battle? When they are not battling together
they are not fragments, because they are not acting as parts. The
acting of one part on another ceases. That is what it means when
you say fragmentation. That is what fragmentation
Krishnamurti: See what has taken place! Naude: The fragments
disappear when they are not acting against each other.
Krishnamurti: Naturally! When Pakistan and India...
Naude: ...are no longer fighting, there is no more Pakistan and

India.
Krishnamurti: Naturally.
Naude: Are you saying that that is the change?
Krishnamurti: Wait, I don't know yet. We'll go into it. A human
mind has realized that the world is "me" and I am the world, my
consciousness is the consciousness of the world, and the world's
consciousness is me. The content of consciousness with all its
miseries and so on is consciousness. And within that consciousness
there are a thousand fragmentations. One fragment of those many
fragments becomes the authority, the censor, the observer, the
examiner, the thinker.
Naude: The boss.
Krishnamurti: The boss. And so he maintains fragmentation.
See the importance of this! The moment he assumes the authority,
he must maintain fragmentation.
Naude: Yes, obviously. Because it is a part of consciousness
acting on the rest of consciousness.
Krishnamurti: Therefore he must maintain conflict. And conflict
is consciousness.
Naude: You have said that the fragments are consciousness; and
are you now saying that the fragments are in fact the content?
Krishnamurti: Of course.
Naude: Fragments are conflict. There is no fragment without
conflict?
Krishnamurti: When is consciousness active?
Naude: When it is in conflict.
Krishnamurti: Obviously. Otherwise there is freedom, free- dom
to observe. So radical revolution in consciousness, and of

consciousness, takes place when there is no conflict at all.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
III CHAPTER 2 2ND CONVERSATION WITH
ALAIN NAUDE MALIBU CALIFORNIA 28TH
MARCH 1971 'ON GOOD AND EVIL'
Naude: Do good and evil really exist, or are they simply
conditioned points of view? Is there such a thing as evil and if so
what is it? Is there such a thing as sin? And is there such a thing as
goodness? And what is it to be really and deeply good?
Krishnamurti: I was thinking this morning on the same theme as
your questions imply, whether there is an absolute good and
absolute evil: as the Christian idea of sin and the Asiatic idea of
Karma - as action which breeds more misery and more sorrow and
yet out of that conflict of sorrow and pain a goodness is born. I was
thinking about it the other day when I saw on the television some
men killing baby seals. It is a terrible thing, I turned my head away
quickly. Killing has always been wrong, not only human beings but
animals. And religious people, not the people who believe in
religion, but the really religious mind, has always shunned every
form of killing. Of course, when you eat a vegetable you are killing
- a vegetable - but that is the least form of killing and the simplest
form of survival: I wouldn't call that killing. One has watched in
India, in Europe, and in America the acceptance of killing in war,
in organized murder, which war is. Also "killing" people with
words, with a gesture, with a look, with contempt: this form of
killing has also been decried by religious people. But in spite of it
all, killing has been going on - killing, violence, brutality,
arrogance, aggressiveness - all ultimately leading, in action or in

thought, to hurting, to brutalizing others. Also one has seen those
ancient caves in North Africa and in the South of France where
man is shown fighting animals, where perhaps fighting evil is
understood. Or is it fighting as a form of amusement, to kill
something, to overcome? So when one looks at all this, one asks if
there is such a thing as evil in itself, totally devoid of the good; and
what is the distance between evil and good. Is evil the diminution
of good, slowly ending in evil? Or is good the diminution of evil,
gradually becoming good? That is, through the time interval,
moving from goodness to evil, and from evil to good?
Naude: You mean are they two ends of the same stick?
Krishnamurti: Two ends of the same stick - or are they two
wholly separate things? So what is evil and what is good? The
Christian world, the Inquisition, used to burn people for heresy,
considering that was good.
Naude: The Communists do the same.
Krishnamurti: The Communists do it in their own way: for the
good of the community, for the good of society, for the good of an
economic well-being for the whole of man, and so on. In Asia too
they have done all this kind of thing in various forms. But there has
always been a group, until recently, where killing in any form was
considered evil. Now all that is slowly disappearing, for economic
and cultural reasons.
Naude: You mean the group that avoids killing...
Krishnamurti: ...is gradually disappearing. So there it is. Now is
there such a thing as absolute good, and absolute evil? is it a
gradation: relative goodness and relative evil?
Naude: And do they exist as facts outside of conditioned points

view? For instance, for the Frenchman during the war the invading
German was evil; and similarly for the German, the German
soldier was good, he represented protection. Now is re a good and
an evil, absolutely? Or is it simply the result conditioned point of
view?
Krishnamurti: Is goodness dependent on the environment, on
culture, on economic conditions? And if it is, is it good? Can
goodness flower as an environmental, cultural conditionAnd is evil
also the result of environmental culture? Does it function within
that frame, or does it function outside it? these questions are
implied when we ask: is there an absolute goodness and absolute
evil? Naude: Right.
Krishnamurti: First of all, what is goodness? Isn't the word
"goodness" related to the word "God"? God being the highest form
of the good, truth, excellence, and the capacity to express in
relationship that quality of godliness, which is goodness; and
anything opposite that is considered evil. If goodness is related to
God, then evil is related to the devil. The devil being the ugly, the
dark, the...
Naude: ...the twisted...
Krishnamurti: ...the distorted, the purposefully directed harmful,
such as the desire to hurt - all that is contrary to the good; that is,
the idea of God being good and the devil being the evil - right?
Now I think we have more or less indicated what is good and what
is evil. So we are asking if there is such a thing as absolute good
and absolute, irrevocable evil.
Naude: Evil as a fact, as a thing.
Krishnamurti: Therefore let us first examine if there is absolute

good. Not in the sense of goodness being related to God, or
approximating itself to the idea of God, because then that goodness
becomes merely speculative. Because God to most people is really
a pretence of a belief in something - something excellent, noble.
Naude: Felicity?
Krishnamurti: Felicity and so on. Now what is good? I feel
goodness is total order. Not only outwardly, but especially
inwardly. I think that order can be absolute, as in mathematics I
believe there is complete order. And it is disorder that leads to
chaos, to destruction, to anarchy, to the so-called evil.
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Whereas total order in one's being, order in the
mind, order in one's heart, order in one's physical activities - the
harmony between the three is goodness.
Naude: The Greeks used to say that perfected man had attuned
in total harmony his mind, his heart and his body. Krishnamurti:
Quite. So we shall say for the moment that goodness is absolute
order. And as most human beings live in disorder they contribute to
every form of mischief, which ultimately leads to destruction, to
brutality, to violence, to various injuries, both psychic and
physical. For all that one word may be used: "evil". But I don't like
that word "evil" because it is loaded with Christian meaning, with
condemnation and prejudice.
Naude: Conditioning.
Krishnamurti: That's right. In India and in Asia the words
"evil", "sin", are always loaded - as "goodness" is always loaded.
So could we brush away all the accumulations around these words
and look at it as though anew. That is: is there absolute order in

oneself? Can this absolute order be brought about in oneself and
therefore in the outer world? Because the world is me, and I am the
world; my consciousness is the consciousness of the world, and the
consciousness of the world is me. So when there is order within the
human being then there is order in the world. Now can this order,
right through, be absolute? Which means: order in the mind, in the
heart and in the bodily activities. That is, complete harmony. How
can this be brought about? That is one point.
Then the other point is: is order something to be copied
according to a design? Is order pre-established by thought, by the
intellect, and copied in action by the heart? Or in relationship? So
is order a blueprint? How is this order to be brought about?
Naude: Right.
Krishnamurti: Order is virtue. And disorder is non-virtue, is
harmful, is destructive, is impure - if we can use that word.
Naude: One thinks of the Sanskrit word "Adharma".
Krishnamurti: Adharma, yes. So is order something put together
according to a design drawn by knowledge, thought? Or is order
outside the field of thought and knowledge? One feels there is
absolute goodness, not as an emotional concept, but one knows, if
one has gone into oneself deeply, that there is such a thing:
complete, absolute, irrevocable goodness, or order. And this order
is not a thing put together by thought; if it is, then it is according to
a blueprint, but if it is imitated then the imitation leads to disorder,
or to conformity. Conformity, imitation, and the denial of what is,
is the beginning of disorder, leading ultimately to what may be
called evil. So we are asking: is goodness, which is (as we said)
order and virtue, is it the product of thought? Which means can it

be cultivated by thought? Can virtue ever be cultivated? To
cultivate implies to bring slowly into being which means time.
Naude: Mental synthesis.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Now is virtue the result of time? And is
order therefore a matter of evolution? And so is absolute order,
absolute goodness, a matter of slow growth, cultivation, all
involving time? As we said the other day thought is the response of
memory knowledge, and experience, which is the past which is
stored up in the brain. In the brain cells themselves the past is. So
does virtue lie in the past and is it therefore cultivatable, to be
pushed forward? Or is virtue, order, only i the now? The now is not
related to the past.
Naude: You are saying that goodness is order and that order is
not the product of thought; but order, if it exists at all, must exist in
behaviour, behaviour in the world and in relationship. People
always think that proper behaviour in relationship, in the world
must be planned, that order is always the result of planning. And
quite often people get the idea, when they have listened to you, that
awareness, the state of being you speak about in which there is no
room for the action of thought, they get the feeling that this is a
sort of disincarnate energy, which can have no action and no
relationship to the world of men and events and behaviour. They
think that therefore it has no real value, and not what you might
call a temporal and historical significance.
Krishnamurti: Right, Sir.
Naude: You are saying that goodness is order and order is not
planned.
Krishnamurti: When we talk about order, don't we mean order

in behaviour, in relationship, not an abstract order, not a goodness
in heaven, but order, goodness in relationship and action in the
now. When we talk about planning, obviously there must be
planning at a certain level.
Naude: Architecture.
Krishnamurti: Architecture, building railways, going to the
moon and so on there must be a design, a planning, a very coordinated intelligent operation taking place. We are surely not
mixing up the two: there must be planning, order, co-operation, the
carrying out together of certain plans, a well laid-out city, a
community - all that demands planning. We are talking of
something entirely different. We are asking if there is absolute
order in human behaviour, if there is absolute goodness, as order,
in oneself and therefore in the world. And we said order is not
planned, can never be planned. If it is planned, then the mind is
seeking security, because the brain demands security; seeking
security it will suppress, or destroy, or pervert what is and try to
conform, imitate. This very imitation and conformity is disorder,
from which all the mischief begins, the neuroses and various
distortions of the mind and the heart. Planning implies knowledge.
Naude: Thinking.
Krishnamurti: Knowledge, thinking and ordering the thought as
ideas. So we are asking: is virtue the outcome of planning?
Obviously it is not. The moment your life is planned according to a
pattern then you are not living, you are merely conforming to a
certain standard and therefore that conformity leads to
contradiction in oneself. The "what is" and the "what should be"
that breeds contradiction and therefore conflict. That very conflict

is the source of disorder. So order, virtue, goodness is in the
moment of the now. And therefore it is free of the past. That
freedom can be relative.
Naude: How do you mean?
Krishnamurti: One may be conditioned by the culture in which
one lives, by the environment and so on. One either frees oneself
totally from all the conditioning and therefore is absolutely free; or
there may be partial unconditioning. Naude: Yes, get rid of one set
of conditions...
Krishnamurti: ...and fall into another.
Naude: Or just discard one set like Christianity and it taboos.
Krishnamurti: So that slow discarding may appear orderly, but
it is not; because the slow peeling off of conditioning may
temporarily give the appearance of freedom, but is not absolute
freedom.
Naude: Are you saying that freedom is not the result of
particular operation with regard to one conditioning o another?
Krishnamurti: That's right.
Naude: You have said that freedom is at the beginning and not
at the end. Is that what you mean?
Krishnamurti: Yes, that's it. Freedom is now, not in the future.
So freedom, order, or goodness, is now, which expresses itself in
behaviour.
Naude: Yes, else it has no meaning.
Krishnamurti: Otherwise it has no meaning at all. Behaviour in
relationship not only with a particular individual, who is close to
you, but behaviour with everybody.
Naude: In the absence of all those elements of the past which

make most people behave, what will make us behave? This
freedom seems to so many people such a disincarnate thing, such a
bleak sky, such an immaterial thing. What is it in that freedom
which will make us behave in the world of people an events with
order?
Krishnamurti: Sir, look. We said in the last conversation that I
am the world and the world is me. We said the consciousness of
the world is my consciousness. My consciousness is the world's
consciousness. When you make a statement of that kind either it is
purely verbal and therefore has no meaning at all or it is something
actual, living, vital. When one realizes that it is vital, in that
realization is compassion - real compassion, not for one or two, but
compassion for everybody, for everything. Freedom is this
compassion, which is not disincarnate as an idea.
Naude: As a state of withdrawal.
Krishnamurti: My relationship is only in the now, not in the
past, because if my relationship is rooted in the past I am not
related now. So freedom is compassion, and that comes when there
is the real deep realization that I am the world, the world is me.
Freedom, compassion, order, virtue, goodness are one; and that is
absolute. Now what relationship has non-goodness - which has
been called evil, sin, original sin - what relationship has that with
this marvellous sense of order?
Naude: Which is not the product of thinking, of civilization, of
culture.
Krishnamurti: What is the relationship between the two? There
is none. So when we move away from this order - move away in
the sense of misbehave - does one enter into the field of evil, if we

can use that word? Or is evil something totally apart from the
good?
Naude: Whether deviation from the order of goodness is already
an entry into the field of evil, or can these two not even touch at
all?
Krishnamurti: That's right. I may misbehave. I may tell a lie. I
may consciously or unconsciously hurt another, but I can clear it. I
can wipe it away by apologizing, by saying "forgive me". It can be
done immediately.
Naude: It can be ended.
Krishnamurti: So I am finding out something, which is: the nonending of it, carrying it over in one's mind day after day, as hate, as
a grudge...
Naude: ...guilt, fear...
Krishnamurti: ...does that nourish the evil? You follow?
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: If I continue with it, keep within my mind the
grudge which I bear against you, carry it on day after day, the
grudge which involves hate, envy, jealousy, antagonism - all that is
violence. So what is the relationship of violence to evil and
goodness? We are using the word "evil" very...
Naude: ...cautiously.
Krishnamurti: Cautiously. Because I don't like that word at all.
So what is the relationship between violence and goodness?
Obviously none at all! But the violence which I have cultivated whether it is the product of society, the product of the culture, the
environment, or inherited from the animal - that violence, by
becoming aware of it, can be wiped away.

Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Not a gradual wiping away; wipe it away as you
wipe out a clean...
Naude: ...take a mark off the wall.
Krishnamurti: Then you are always in that goodness.
Naude: Are you saying that goodness is a wholly negative affair
then?
Krishnamurti: Yes, it must be.
Naude: And in that way the negative is not related at all to the
positive, because it is not the result of a gradual decline or
accumulation of the positive. The negative exists when the positive
is wholly absent.
Krishnamurti: Yes; put it round the other way. The negation of
the grudge, the negation of violence and the negation of the
continuity of the violence, that negation of it is the good.
Naude: Is the emptying.
Krishnamurti: The emptying of violence is the richness of the
good.
Naude: Therefore the good is always intact.
Krishnamurti: Yes, it is never broken up, not fragmented. Sir,
wait! So is there such a thing as absolute evil? I don't know if you
have ever considered this: I have seen in India little statues made of
clay in which needles, or thorns, have been put; I have seen it very
often. The image is supposed to represent a person whom you want
to hurt. In India there are very long thorns, you have seen them,
from bushes, and they are stuck into these clay statuettes.
Naude: I didn't know they did that in India.
Krishnamurti: I have seen it. Now there is a determined action

to produce evil in another, to hurt another.
Naude: An intent.
Krishnamurti: The intent, the ugly, deep, hatred.
Naude: Deliberate. This must be evil, Sir.
Krishnamurti: What is its relationship to good - good being all
that we have said? This is a real intent to hurt people.
Naude: Organized disorder, one might say.
Krishnamurti: Organized disorder, which is the organized
disorder of a society that rejects the good. Because the society is
me. I am the society; if I don't change, society cannot change. And
here is the deliberate intention to hurt another, whether it is
organized as war or not.
Naude: In fact, organized war is the group manifestation of the
phenomenon you are speaking about in India, putting the thorns
through the little statues.
Krishnamurti: This is well known, this is as old as the hills. So I
am saying this desire to hurt, consciously or unconsciously, and
yielding to it, and giving it sustenance, is what? Would you call
that evil?
Naude: Of course.
Krishnamurti: Then we shall have to say that will is evil.
Naude: Aggression is evil. Violence is evil.
Krishnamurti: Wait, see it! Will is evil, because I want to hurt
you. Naude: Someone might say though: the will to do you good is that will also evil?
Krishnamurti: You cannot will to do good. Either you are good,
or not good, you can't will goodness. Will being the concentration
of thought as resistance.

Naude: Yes, you said that goodness is the absence of a
blueprint.
Krishnamurti: So I am asking: is evil related to the good, or are
the two things totally apart? And is there such a thing as absolute
evil? There is absolute good, but absolute evil cannot exist. Right?
Naude: Yes, because evil is always cumulative, it is always to
some degree or another.
Krishnamurti: Yes. So a man with the deep intention to hurt
another - some incident, some accident, some affection or care,
might change the whole thing. But to say that there is an absolute
sin, absolute evil, is the most terrible thing to say. That is evil.
Naude: The Christians have personified evil as Satan and as an
almost immutable force, almost equal to the good, almost equal to
God. The Christians have enthroned evil almost eternally.
Krishnamurti: Look, Sir. You have seen those bushes in India,
they have got long thorns, nearly two inches long.
Naude: Yes.
Krishnamurti: There are snakes which are poisonous, deadly
poisonous, there are other things which are frighteningly cruel in
nature, like the white shark, that appalling thing we saw the other
day. Is that evil?
Naude: No.
Krishnamurti: No?
Naude: No, Sir.
Krishnamurti: It is protecting itself: the thorn is protecting itself
against the animal so that the leaves are not eaten. Naude: Yes and
so is the snake.
Krishnamurti: So is the snake.

Naude: And the shark is following its nature.
Krishnamurti: So see what it means. Anything that is selfprotective in the physical sense is not evil. But protecting oneself
psychologically, resisting any movement, leads to disorder.
Naude: If I may interrupt here. This is the argument which
many people use about war. They say that building up an army and
using it, for instance, in South East Asia is the kind of physical
protection which the shark...
Krishnamurti: That is too absurd an argument. The whole world
is divided up for psychological reasons as "my country" and "your
country", "my God" and "your God" - that and economic reasons
are the cause of war, surely? But I am trying to get at something
different. Nature is terrible in certain ways.
Naude: Ruthless.
Krishnamurti: We human beings looking at it say, "That's evil,
how terrible".
Naude: Lightning.
Krishnamurti: Earthquakes which destroy a thousand people in
a few seconds. So the moment we assert that there is absolute evil,
that very assertion is the denial of the good. Goodness implies total
abnegation of the self. Because the "me" is always separative. The
"me", "my family", the self, the person, the ego, is the centre of
disorder, because it is a divisive factor. The "me" is the mind, is
thought. And we have never been able to move away from this
egocentric activity. To move completely away from it is complete
order, freedom, goodness. And to remain in the circle of selfcentred movement breeds disorder; there is always conflict there.
And we attribute this conflict to evil, to the devil, to bad karma, to

environment, to society; but the society is me and I have built this
society. So unless this me is totally transformed I am always
contributing to a major extent or to a minor extent to disorder.
Order means behaviour in freedom. And freedom means love and
not pleasure. When one observes all this one sees very clearly that
there is a marvellous sense of absolute order.

SAANEN 1ST CONVERSATION WITH SWAMI
VENKATESANANDA 25TH JULY 1969
Swami Venkatesananda: Krishnaji, I come as a humble speaker to
a guru, not in the sense of hero worship but in its literal sense, as
the remover of darkness of ignorance, which the word guru stands
for. 'Gu' stands for the darkness of ignorance and 'ru' stands for the
remover, the dispeller. Hence guru is the light that dispels the
darkness of ignorance and you are that light for me now. We sit in
the tent listening to you, and I cannot help visualizing similar
scenes. For instance, Buddha addressing the Bhikshus, or Vasishta
instructing Rama in the royal court of Dasaratha. We have a few
examples of these gurus in the Upanishads; first there was Varuna,
the guru, he is very much like you. He merely prods his disciple
with the words 'Tapasa Brahma... Tapo Brahmeti'. What is
Brahman? Don't ask me. Tapo Brahman, tapas, austerity or
discipline or as you yourself often say, 'Find out'. And the disciple
himself discovers the truth, though by stages. Yajnyavalkya and
Uddhalaka adopted a more direct approach. Yajnyavalkya
instructing his wife Maitreyi, used the neti-neti method. You
cannot describe Brahman positively, but when you eliminate al the
others, it is there. As you said the other day, love cannot be
described, "this is it", but only by eliminating what is not love.
Uddhalaka used several analogies to enable his disciples to see the
truth and then nailed it with the famous expression Tat-Twam-Asi.
Dakshinamurti instructed his disciples by silence and Chinmudra.
It is said that the Sanatkumaras went to him for instruction. When I
read the descriptions of what Krishnamurti was when he was a

young age, I am often reminded of that. These old sages went to
him and Dakshinamurti just kept silent and showed the Chinmudra
and the disciples looked at him and got enlightened. It is believed
that one cannot realize the truth without the help, or whatever you
call it, of a guru. Obviously even those people who regularly come
to Saanen are greatly helped in their quest. Now, what according to
you is the role of a guru, a preceptor or an awakener?
Krishnaji: Sir, if you are using the word guru in the classical
sense, which is the dispeller of darkness, of ignorance, can another,
whatever he be, enlightened or stupid, really help to dispel this
darkness in oneself? Suppose 'A' is ignorant and you are his guru guru in the accepted sense, one who dispels darkness and one who
carries the burden for another, one who points out - can such a guru
help another? Or rather can the guru dispel the darkness of
another? - not theoretically but actually. Can you, if you are the
guru of so and so, can you dispel the darkness of another, for
another? Knowing that he is unhappy, confused, has not enough
brain matter, has not enough love, or sorrow, can you dispel that?
Or has he to work tremendously on himself? You may point out,
you may say, 'Look, go through that door,' but he has to do the
work entirely from the beginning to the end. Therefore, you are not
a guru in the accepted sense of that word, if you say that another
cannot help.
Swamiji: It is just this: the 'if' and 'but'. The door is there. I have
to go through. But there is this ignorance of where the door is.
You, by pointing out, remove that ignorance.
Krishnaji: But I have to walk there. Sir, you are the guru and
you point out the door. You have finished your job.

Swamiji: So darkness of ignorance is removed.
Krishnaji: No, your job is finished and it is now for me to get
up, walk, and see what is involved in walking. I have to do all that.
Swamiji: That is perfect.
Krishnaji: Therefore you do not dispel my darkness.
Swamiji: I am sorry. Now I do not know how to get out of this
room. I am ignorant of the existence of a door in a certain direction
and the guru removes the darkness of that ignorance. And then I
take the necessary steps to get out.
Krishnaji: Sir, let us be clear. Ignorance is lack of
understanding, or the lack of understanding of oneself, not the big
self or the little self. The door is the 'me' through which I have to
go. It is not outside of 'me'. It is not a factual door as that painted
door. It is a door in me through which I have to go. You say, 'Do
that.'
Swamiji: Exactly.
Krishnaji: You, as a guru, have finished. You do not become
important. I do not put garlands around your head. I have to do all
the work, all the work. You have not dispelled the darkness of
ignorance. You have, rather, pointed out to me that, "You are the
door through which you yourself have to go."
Swamiji: But would you, Krishnaji, accept that that pointing out
was necessary?
Krishnaji: Yes, of course. I point out, I do that. We all do that. I
ask a man on the road, "Will you please tell me which is the way to
Saanen", and he tells me; but I do not spend time and devotion and
love and say, "My God, you are the greatest of men." That is too
childish!

Swamiji: Thank you, sir. Closely related to what the guru is,
there is the question of what discipline is. The disciple is discipline
which you defined as learning. Vedanta classifies the seekers
according to their qualifications, or maturity, and prescribes
suitable methods of learning. The disciple with the keenest
perception is given instruction in silence, or a brief awakening
word like Tat-Twam-Asi. He is called Uttamadhikari. The disciple
with the mediocre ability is given more elaborate treatment; he is
called Madhyamadhikari. The dull-witted is entertained with
stories, rituals, etc., hoping for greater maturity; he is called
Adhamadhikari. Perhaps you will comment on this?
Krishnaji: Yes, the top, the middle and bottom. That implies,
sir, that we have to find out what we mean by maturity.
Swamiji: May I explain that? You said the other day, "The
whole world is burning, you must realize the seriousness of it."
And that hit me like a bolt - even to grasp that truth. But there may
be millions who just do not bother; they are not interested. Those
we shall call the Adhama, the lowest. There are others like the
Hippies and so on who play with it, who may be entertained with
stories and who say, "We are unhappy," or who tell you, "We
know society is a mess, we will take L.S.D.", and so on. And there
may be others who respond to that idea, that the world is burning,
and that immediately sparks them. We find them everywhere. How
does one handle them?
Krishnaji: How to handle the people who are utterly immature,
those who are partially mature, and those who consider themselves
mature?
Swamiji: Correct.

Krishnaji: To do that, what do we mean by maturity? What do
you think is maturity? Does it depend on age, time?
Swamiji: No.
Krishnaji: So we can remove that. Time, age is not an indication
of maturity. Then there is the maturity of the very learned man, the
man who is highly, intellectually capable.
Swamiji: No he may twist and turn the words.
Krishnaji: So we will consider him not mature. Whom would
you consider as a mature, ripe man?
Swamiji: The man who is able to observe.
Krishnaji: Wait. Obviously the man who goes to churches, to
temples, to mosques is not; the obvious things are not. So what
would one consider a mature man? Not the intellectual, the
religious and the emotional, not who plays intellectually and all the
rest of it. We should say, if we eliminate all that, maturity consists
in being not self-centred - not 'me' first and everybody else second,
or my emotions first. So maturity implies the absence of the 'me'.
Swamiji: Absence of fragmentation, to use a better word.
Krishnaji: The 'me' which creates the fragments. Now, how
would you appeal to that man? And to the man who is half one and
half, 'me' and 'not me', who plays with both? And the other one
who is completely 'me', who enjoys himself? How do you appeal to
these three?
Swamiji: How do you awaken these three in other words. That
is the trouble.
Krishnaji: Wait! The man who is completely 'me', there is no
awakening in him. He is not interested. He won't even listen to
you. He will listen to you if you promise him something, heaven,

hell, fear or more profit in the world, more money; but he will do it
in order to gain. So the man who wishes to gain, achieve, is
immature.
Swamiji: Quite right.
Krishnaji: Whether Nirvana, Heaven, Moksha, attainment, or
enlightenment, he is immature. Now, what will you do with such a
man?
Swamiji: Tell him stories.
Krishnaji: No, why should I tell him stories, befuddle him more
by my stories or by your stories? Why not leave him alone? He
would not listen.
Swamiji: It is cruel.
Krishnaji: Cruel on whose part? He won't listen to you. Let us
be factual. You come to me. I am the total 'me'. I am not concerned
with anything but 'me', and you say "Look, you are making a mess
of the world, you are creating such misery for man", and he says,
please go away. Put it any way you like; put it in stories, cover it
with pills, sweet pills, but he is not going to change the 'me'. If he
does, he comes to the middle - the 'me' and the 'not me'. This is
called evolution. The man who is the lowest reaches the middle.
Swamiji: How?
Krishnaji: By knocking. Life forces him, teaches him. There is
war, hatred; he is destroyed. Or he goes into a church. The church
is a trap to him. It does not enlighten him, it does not say, "For
God's sake break through," but it says it will give him what he
wants - entertainment, whether Jesus entertainment, or Hindu
entertainment, or Buddhist, or Muslim or whatever it is - it will
give him entertainment, only in the name of God. So they keep him

at the same level, with little modifications, a little bit of polish,
better culture, better clothes, eat properly, consider a little bit, not
too much, others. That is what is happening. He probably makes up
(as you said just now) eighty per cent of the world, more perhaps,
ninety per cent. And you have the churches, the temples, the
mosques, the shrines and so on.
Swamiji: What can you do?
Krishnaji: I won't add to it, I won't tell him stories, I won't
entertain him; because there are others who are already
entertaining him.
Swamiji: Thank you.
Krishnaji: So why should I join that group? Then there is the
middle one, the 'me' and the 'not-me', who does social reforms, a
little bit of good here and there, but always the 'me' operating.
Socially, politically, religiously, in every way, the 'me' is operating.
But a little more quietly, with a little more polish. Now to him you
can talk a little bit, say, "Look, a social reform is all right in its
place but it leads you nowhere," and so on. You can talk to him.
Perhaps he will listen to you. The other one will not listen to you at
all. This chap will listen to you, pay a little attention and say, well,
this is too serious, this requires too much work, and slips back into
his old pattern. We shall talk to him and leave him. What he wants
to do is up to him. Now, there is the other one who is getting out of
the 'me', who is stepping out of the circle of the 'me'. There, you
can talk to him. He will pay attention to you. So one talks to all the
three, not distinguishing between those who are mature and those
who are not mature. We will talk to all the three categories, the
three types, and leave it to them.

Swamiji: The one who is not interested, he will walk out.
Krishnaji: He will walk out of the tent, he will walk out of the
room. That is his affair. He goes to his church, football,
entertainment or whatever it is. But the moment you say "you are
immature and I will teach you more", he becomes...
Swamiji: Boosted up.
Krishnaji: The seed of poison is always there. Sir, if the soil is
right, the grain will take root. But to say, 'You are mature, and you
are not mature', that is totally wrong. Who am I to tell somebody
that he is immature? It is for him to find out.
Swamiji: But can a fool find out that he is a fool?
Krishnaji: If he is a fool he won't even listen to you. You see,
sir, we start out with the idea of wanting to help.
Swamiji: That is what we are basing our whole discussion upon.
Krishnaji: I think that approach is not valid, except in the
medical world or in the technological world it is necessary. I may
go to the doctor to be cured. Here, psychologically, if I am asleep, I
won't listen to you. If I am half awake, I will listen to you
according to my vacant state, according to my moods. Therefore,
to the one man who says, "I really want to keep awake, keep
psychologically awake", to him you can talk. So we talk to all of
them.
Swamiji: Thank you. That clears up a big misunderstanding.
When sitting alone, I reflected over what you had said earlier in the
day. I cannot help the spontaneous feeling. "Ah, the Buddha said
so", or "Vasishtha said so", though immediately I endeavour to cut
through the imagery of the words to find the meaning. You help us
find the meaning, though perhaps that is not your intention. So did

Vasishtha and the Buddha. People come here as they went to those
great ones. Why? What is there in human nature that seeks, that
gropes and grasps for a crutch? Again, not to help them may be a
cruelty, but to spoon-feed them may be greater cruelty. What does
one do?
Krishnaji: The question being, why do people need crutches?
Swamiji: Yes, and whether to help them or not.
Krishnaji: That is it: whether you should give them crutches to
lean on. Two questions are involved. Why do people need
crutches? And whether you are the person to give them the
crutches?
Swamiji: Should one or should one not?
Krishnaji: Should one or should one not, and whether you are
capable of giving them help? Those two questions are involved.
Why do people want crutches, why do people want to depend on
others, whether it is Jesus, Buddha, or ancient saints, why?
Swamiji: First of all, there is something that is seeking. The
seeking itself seems to be good.
Krishnaji: Is it? Or is it their fear of not achieving something
which the saints, the great people, have pointed out? Or the fear of
going wrong, of not being happy, of not getting enlightenment,
understanding, or whatever you call it?
Swamiji: May I quote a beautiful expression from the Bhagvadgita? Krishna said: four types of people come to me. The one who
is in distress; he comes to me for the removal of distress. Then
there is the one who is a curious man; he just wants to know what
is this God, truth, and whether there is heaven and hell? The third
one wants some money. He also comes to God and prays to get

more money, let me become a millionaire, a multi millionaire. And
the Gyani, the wise man, also comes. All of them are good,
because they are all, somehow or the other, seeking God. But of all
these, I think the Gyani is the best one. So the seeking may be due
to all sorts of reasons.
Krishnaji: Yes, sir. There are these two questions. First of all,
why do we seek? Then, why does humanity demand crutches?
Now, why does one seek, why should one seek at all?
Swamiji: Why should one seek?
Krishnaji: Why does one seek and why should one seek at all?
Swamiji: Why should one seek? Because one finds something
missing.
Krishnaji: Which means what? I am unhappy and I want
happiness. That is a form of seeking. I do not know what
enlightenment is. I have read about it in books and it appeals to me
and I seek it. Also I seek a better job, because there is more money,
more profit, more enjoyment and so on. In all these there is
seeking, searching, wanting. I can understand the man wanting a
better job, because society is so monstrously arranged, as it is, that
makes him seek more money, a better job. But psychologically,
inwardly, what am I seeking? And when I do find it, in my search,
how do I know that what I find is true?
Swamiji: Perhaps the seeking drops.
Krishnaji: Wait, sir. How do I know? In my search, how do I
know that this is the truth? How do I know? Can I ever say "This is
the truth"? Therefore why should I seek it? So what makes me
seek? What makes one seek is a much more fundamental question
than the search, and saying, "This is the truth." If I say, "This is the

truth", I must know it already. If I know it already, it is not truth. It
is something dead, past, which tells me that is the truth. A dead
thing cannot tell me what is truth.
So why do I seek? Because, deeply I am unhappy, deeply I am
confused, deeply there is great sorrow in me and I want to find a
way out of it. You come along as the guru, as an enlightened man,
or as a professor and say, 'Look, this is the way out.' The basic
reason for my search is to escape from this agony and I posit that I
can escape, and that enlightenment is over there, or in myself. Can
I escape from it? I cannot in the sense of avoiding it, resisting it,
running away from it; it is there. Wherever I go, it is still there. So
what I have to do is to find out in myself why sorrow has come
into being, why I am suffering. Then, is that a search? No. When I
want to find out why I am suffering, that is not searching. It is not
even a quest. It is like going to a doctor and saying I have tummy
ache, and he says you have eaten the wrong kind of food.
So I will avoid wrong food. If the cause of my misery is in
myself not necessarily created by the environment in which I live,
then I have to find out how to be free from it for myself. You may,
as the guru, point out that that is the door, but as soon as you have
pointed it out, your job is over. Then I have to work, then I have to
find out what to do, how to live, how to think, how to feel this way
of living in which there is no suffering.
Swamiji: Then to that extent the helping, the pointing out, is
justified.
Krishnaji: Not justified, but you do it naturally.
Swamiji: Supposing the other man gets stuck somewhere, that
as he goes there, in going there he knocks against this table...

Krishnaji: He must learn that the table is there. He must learn
that when he is going towards the door there is an obstacle in the
way. If he is enquiring, he will find out. But if you come along and
say, "There is the door, there is the table don't knock against it",
you are treating him just like a child leading him to the door. There
is no meaning to it.
Swamiji: So that much of help, the pointing out, is justified?
Krishnaji: Any decent man with a decent heart will say, look,
don't go there, there is a precipice. I once met a very well-known
guru in India. He came to see me. And it was quite an odd
performance he put up. There was a mattress on the floor and we
said to him politely, please sit on the mattress. He quietly sat on the
mattress, assumed the position of the guru, put his stick in front of
him and began to discuss. nd he said: we need gurus because we
know better than the layman; why should he go through all the
danger alone? We will help him. It was impossible to discuss with
him because he had assumed that he knew and everybody else was
in ignorance. At the end of ten minutes he left, rather annoyed.
Swamiji: That is one of the things for which Krishnaji is famous
in India! Next, while you rightly point out the utter futility of
blindly accepting formulas and dogmas, you will not ask for their
summary rejection. While tradition can be a deadly block, it is
perhaps worth understanding it and its origin; else we might
destroy one tradition and an equally pernicious one might spring
up.
Krishnaji: Quite right.
Swamiji: Hence may I offer a few traditional beliefs for your
scrutiny so that we may discover where and how what you called

'good intentions' veered towards hell - the shell that imprisons us?
Each branch of Yoga prescribed its own disciplines in the firm
conviction that if one pursued them in the right spirit one would
end sorrow. I shall enumerate them for your comments.
Karma Yoga: it demanded Dharma, or a virtuous life, which
was often extended to include the much abused Varnashrama
Dharma. Krishna's dictum 'Swadharme... Bhayavaha', seems to
have indicated that if a man voluntarily submitted himself to
certain rules of conduct, his mind would be free to observe and
learn with the help of certain Bhavanas. Would you comment on
this? The concept of Dharma and rules and regulations: 'do this',
'that is right', 'that is wrong....'
Krishnaji: Which means really, you lay down what is right
conduct.
Swamiji: And I voluntarily adopt it.
Krishnaji: There is a teacher who lays down what is righteous
behaviour, and I come along and voluntarily, to use your word,
take to it, accept it. Is there such a thing as voluntary acceptance?
And should you lay down what is right conduct, should the teacher
lay down what is right conduct, which means he has set the pattern,
the mould, the conditioning? You follow the danger of it? He has
laid down the conditioning which produces right behaviour, which
will lead one to heaven.
Swamiji: That is one aspect of it. The other aspect in which I
am more interested, is if that is accepted, then the psychological
apparatus is free to observe.
Krishnaji: I understand. No, sir. Why should I accept it? You
are the teacher. You lay down the mode of conduct. How do I

know that you are right? You may be wrong. And I won't accept
your authority. Because I see the authority of the gurus, the
authority of the priest, the authority of the Church, they have all
failed. Therefore, with a new teacher laying down a new law, I
would say, "For God's sake you are playing the same game; I do
not accept it." But if I voluntarily accept it, is there such a thing as
voluntary acceptance, free acceptance? Or am I already influenced,
because you are a teacher, you are the great one, and you promise
me a reward at the end of it, unconsciously or consciously, which
leads me to 'voluntarily' accept it? I do not accept it freely. If I am
free, I do not accept it at all. I live. I live righteously.
Swamiji: So righteousness must come from within?
Krishnaji: Obviously, what else, sir? Look at what is going on
in the study of behaviour. They say outward circumstances,
environment, culture, produce certain types of behaviour. That is,
if I live in a communist environment with its domination, with its
threats, exposure, going to the concentration camps, all that will
make me behave in a certain way; I put on a mask, frightened, and
I behave in a certain way. In a society which is more or less free,
where there are not so many rules, because nobody believes in
rules, where everything is permitted, there I play.
Swamiji: Now, which one is more acceptable from the spiritual
point of view?
Krishnaji: Neither. Because behaviour, virtue, is something
which cannot be cultivated by me or by society. I have to find out
how to live rightly. Virtue is something which is not an acceptance
of patterns, or following a deadly pattern of routine. Goodness is
not routine, surely? If I am good because my teacher says I am

good, it is meaningless. Therefore there is no such thing as
voluntary acceptance of the righteous behaviour which is laid
down by a guru, by a teacher.
Swamiji: One has to find it.
Krishnaji: Therefore I have to begin to enquire. I begin to look,
to find out how to live. I can only live when there is no fear.
Swamiji: Perhaps I should have explained this. According to
Sankara it is meant only for the lower.
Krishnaji: What is low and high? The mature and the immature?
Sankara or X Y Z says, "Lay down the rule for the low and for the
high" and they don't do it. They read the books of Sankara, or some
pundit reads it to them, and they say how marvellous it is and go
back and live their own life. This is an obvious fact. You see it in
Italy. They listen to the Pope, and nobody cares either - they listen
earnestly for two or three minutes and then go on with their daily
life; t does not make any difference. That is why I want to ask, why
the so-called Sankaras, Gurus, lay down laws about what is
behaviour.
Swamiji: Otherwise they think there will be chaos.
Krishnaji: There is chaos anyhow. There is terrible chaos. In
India they have read Sankara and all the teachers for ten thousand,
or five thousand years. Look at them!
Swamiji: Perhaps, according to them, the alternative is
impossible.
Krishnaji: What is the alternative? Confusion? And that is what
they are living in. Why not understand the confusion in which they
are living instead of studying Sankara? If they understand
confusion, they can change it.

Swamiji: Perhaps that leads us on to this question of Bhavana
where a bit of psychology is involved. Coming to the Sadhana of
Karma Yoga, the Bhagavad Gita prescribes among other things a
Nimitta Bhavana. Bhavana is undoubtedly Being and Nimitta
Bhavana is being an egoless instrument in the hands of God or the
Infinite Being. But it is also taken to mean an attitude or a feeling
in the hope that it will help a beginner to observe himself and thus
the Bhavana will fill his being. Perhaps it is indispensable for the
people of little understanding; perhaps it will permanently distract
them by self-deception. How shall we make this work?
Krishnaji: What is the question you are asking, sir?
Swamiji: There is the technique of Bkawana.
Krishnaji: That implies a system, a method, by the practice of
which, you ultimately reach enlightenment. You practise in order
to come to God or whatever it is. The moment you practise a
method, what happens? I practise day after day the method laid
down by you. What happens to me?
Swamiji: There is a famous saying, "As you think so you
become".
Krishnaji: I think that by the practice of this method I will reach
enlightenment. So what do I do? Every day I practise it. I become
more and more mechanical.
Swamiji: But there is a feeling.
Krishnaji: The mechanical routine is going on with the feeling
added, "I like it", "I don"t like it", "it is a bore" - you know, there is
a battle going on. So anything I practise, any discipline, any
practice in the accepted sense of the word makes my mind more
and more narrow, limited and dull, and you are promising at the

end of it, heaven. So you are saying, become dull to achieve
heaven. I say it is like soldiers being trained day after day - drill,
drill - till they are nothing but instruments of the commanding
officer or sergeant. Give them a little initiative. So I am
questioning the whole approach of system and method towards
enlightenment. Even in factories a man who merely moves a button
or pushes this or that does not produce as much as the man who is
free to learn as he goes along.
Swamiji: Can you put that into Bhavana?
Krishnaji: Why not?
Swamiji: So it works?
Krishnaji: This is the only way. That is real Bhavana: Learn as
you go along. Therefore no method. Therefore keep awake. Learn
as you go along, therefore be alert as you go along. If I take a walk
and I have a system, a method of walking, that is all I am
concerned with: I shall not see the birds, the trees, the marvellous
light on the leaf, nothing. And why should I accept the teacher who
gives me the method, the mode? He may be as peculiar as I am,
and there are teachers who are very odd. So I reject all that.
Swamiji: The problem again is that of the beginner.
Krishnaji: Who is the beginner? The immature one?
Swamiji: Probably.
Krishnaji: Therefore you are giving him a toy to play with?
Swamiji: Some sort of opening.
Krishnaji: Yes a toy and he enjoys that toy. He says, I am
practising all day, and his mind remains very small.
Swamiji: Perhaps that is your answer to this Bhakti Yoga
question too. Again, somehow they wanted these people to break

through.
Krishnaji: I am not at all sure, sir.
Swamiji: I will discuss this Bhakti. Coming to Bhakti Yoga, the
Bhakta is encouraged to worship God even in temples and images,
feeling the Divine presence within. In quite a number of mantras, it
is repeated again and again, "You are the All Pervading... you are
the Omnipresent", etc. Krishna asks the devotees to see God in the
objects of nature and then as the 'All'. At the same time through
japa, or the repetition of mantra with the corresponding awareness
of its significance, the devotee is asked to perceive that the divine
presence outside is identical with the indwelling presence. Thus the
individual realized his oneness with the collective. Is there
anything fundamentally wrong with that system?
Krishnaji: Oh! Yes, sir. The Communist block does not believe
in God at all. They don't believe in that at all. They are selfish, they
are frightened, but there is no God, no mantras, etc. Another does
not believe in any of that, mantras, japa, repetition but he says, "I
want to find out what truth is. I want to find out if there is a God at
all. There may be no such thing." And the Gita and all of them
assume that there is. They assume there is God. Who are they to
tell me there is or there is not, including Krishna or X, Y, Z? I say
it may be your own conditioning; you are born in that peculiar
climate and with that peculiar tradition, with that peculiar attitude
and you just believe in that. And then you lay down rules. But if I
reject all authority, including the Communists, including the
Western and the Asiatic authorities all authority, then where am I?
Then I have to find out, because I am unhappy, I am miserable.
Swamiji: But I might be free from conditioning.

Krishnaji: That is my business, to be free. Otherwise I cannot
learn. If I remain a Hindu for the rest of my life, I am finished. The
Catholic remains a Catholic and the Communist is equally dead.
But is it possible - that is really the question - to reject all
conditioning which accepts authority? Can I really reject all
authority and stand alone to find out? And I must be alone.
Otherwise, if I am not alone in the deeper sense of that word, I am
just repeating what Sankara, Buddha, or X, Y, Z said. What is the
point of it, knowing very well that repetition is not the real? So,
must not I - mature, or immature, or half mature - must not they all
learn to stand alone? It is painful because they say, "My God, how
can I stand alone?" - to be without the children, to be without God,
to be without the Commissar? There is fear.
Swamiji: Do you think that every one can work out this?
Krishnaji: Why not, sir? If you cannot, then you are caught in it.
Then no amount of Gods, and mantras, and tricks will help you.
They may cover it up. They may bottle it up. They may suppress it
and put it in the refrigerator. But it is always there.
Swamiji: Now there is the other method, that of standing alone:
Raja Yoga. The student here is again asked to cultivate certain
virtuous qualities which, on the one hand, make of him a good
citizen and on the other, remove possible psychological barriers.
This Sadhana, which is mainly awareness of thought which
includes memory, imagination and sleep, seems to be close to your
own teaching. Asana and Pranayama are auxiliaries, perhaps. And
even the Dhyana of Yoga is not intended to bring about selfrealization, which is admittedly not the end product of a series of
actions. Krishna clearly says that Yoga clarifies perception: 'Atma

Shuddhaye'. Do you approve of this approach? There is not much
of help involved here; even Iswara is only 'Purusha Visheshaha'. It
is a sort of a guru, invisible in the indwelling process. Do you
approve of this approach: there is this method of sitting in
meditation and trying to delve deeper and deeper.
Krishnaji: Now wait. One has to go into the question of
meditation.
Swamiji: And Patanjali defines meditation as, "The absence of
all world idea or any extraneous idea." That is the 'Bhakti Sunyam'.
Krishnaji: Look, sir, I have not read anything. Now here I am: I
know nothing. I only know that I am in sorrow and that I have got
a fairly good mind. I have no authority - Sankara, Krishna,
Patanjali, nobody - I am absolutely alone. I have got to face my life
and I have got to be a good citizen - not according to the
Communists, Capitalists, or Socialists. Good citizenship means
behaviour, which is not one thing in the office and different at
home. First, I want to find out how to be free of this sorrow. Then
being free, I shall find out if there is such a thing as God or
whatever it is. So how am I to learn to be free of this enormous
burden? That is my first question. I can only understand it in
relationship with another. I cannot sit by myself and dig into it
because I may pervert it; my mind is too silly, prejudiced. So, I
have to find out in relationship - with nature, with human beings what is this fear, this sorrow; in relationship only, because if I sit
by myself I can deceive myself very well. But by being awake in
relationship, I can spot it immediately.
Swamiji: If you are alert.
Krishnaji: That is the point. If I am alert, watchful, I shall find

out; and that does not take time.
Swamiji: But if one is not?
Krishnaji: Therefore, the problem is to be awake, to be aware,
alert. Is there a method for it? Follow it, sir. If there is a method
which will help me to be aware, I shall practise it; but is that
awareness? Because in that is involved routine, acceptance of
authority, repeating, repeating, repeating, which is gradually
making my alertness dull. So I reject that: the practice of alertness.
I say I can only understand sorrow in relationship and that
understanding comes only through alertness. Therefore, I must be
alert. I am alert because my demand is to end sorrow. Therefore I
must be alert. If I am hungry, I want food and I go after food. In
the same way, I discover the enormous burden of sorrow in me and
I discover it through relationship - how I behave with you, how I
talk to people. In that process of relationship, this thing is revealed.
Swamiji: In that relationship you are alI the time self-aware, if I
may put it that way.
Krishnaji: Yes I am aware, alert, watching.
Swamiji: Is it so easy for an ordinary person?
Krishnaji: It is, if the man is serious and says, "I want to find
out." The ordinary man, eighty to ninety per cent of them, says, I
am not really interested, what are you talking about. Go away, I
want to be entertained, by the Gita, by the church, by Jesus, by
Buddha. I want to be entertained, football. But the man who is
serious, he says, "I shall find out - I want to see if the mind can be
free from sorrow." And it is only possible to discover it in
relationship. I cannot invent sorrow. In relationship sorrow comes.
Swamiji: The sorrow is within.

Krishnaji: Naturally, sir, it is a psychological phenomenon.
Swamiji: You would not want man to sit and meditate and try to
sharpen?
Krishnaji: So let us come back to the question of meditation.
What is meditation? - not according to what Patanjali and others
say because they may be totally mistaken. And I might be mistaken
when I say I know how to meditate. So I have to find out, I have to
say, "Now what is meditation?" Is meditation sitting quiet,
concentrating, controlling thought?
Swamiji: Watching, perhaps.
Krishnaji: You can watch when you are walking.
Swamiji: It is difficult.
Krishnaji: You watch while eating, when you are listening to
people, when somebody says something that hurts you, flatters
you. That means, you have to be alert all the time - when you are
exaggerating, when you are telling half-truths. You follow? To
watch, you need a very quiet mind. That is meditation. The whole
of that is meditation.
Swamiji: To me it looks as though Patanjali evolved an exercise
for quietening the mind, not on the battlefield of life, but to start it
when you are alone and then extend it to relationship.
Krishnaji: But if you escape from the battle...
Swamiji: For a little while...
Krishnaji: If you escape from the battle you have not
understood the battle. The battle is you. How can you escape from
yourself? You can take a drug, you can pretend that you have
escaped, you can repeat mantras, japas and do all kinds of things,
but the battle is going on. You say, "Get away quietly from it and

then come back to it." That is a fragmentation. We are suggesting:
"Look at the battle you are involved in; you are caught in it: you
are it."
Swamiji: That leads us to the last discipline: you are it.
Krishnaji: You are the battle.
Swamiji: You are it, you are the battle, you are the fighter, you
are away from it, you are everything. That is perhaps what is
implied in Gnana Yoga. According to Gnana Yoga, the seeker is
asked to equip himself with the four means: Viveka, seeking the
real and discarding the false; Vairagya, not seeking pleasure; Shat
Satsampath, which meant in effect living a life conducive to the
practice of this yoga; and Mumukshutva, a total dedication to the
search of Truth. The disciple then approached a guru and his
Sadhana consisted of Shravana (hearing), Manana (reflection) and
Nisyudhyajna (assimilation), which all of us do here. The guru
adopted various means to enlighten the student, which usually
implied the realization of the All or the Whole Being. Sankara
describes it thus: "The infinite alone is real, the world is unreal.
The individual is non-different from the infinite," So there is no
fragmentation there. Sankara said that the world is Maya by which
he meant that the world-appearance is not the real, which one has
to investigate and discover. The Upanishads envisaged the Truth in
the following: consciousness is the Infinite. I am the Infinite. Or, I
is the Infinite. Thou are That, the self is Infinite. Even these should
lead to Cosmic Consciousness, or Realization. Everything is the
All, All is Infinite. The Infinite is Infinite. And its active
manifestaion in daily life which Krishna describes thus in the Gita:
"The yogi is then aware that the action, the doer of the action, the

instruments involved, and the object towards which the action is
directed, are all one whole and thus fragmentation is overcome."
How do you react to this Gnana Yoga method? First there is this
Sadhana Chaturdhyaya, for which the disciple prepares himself.
Then he goes to the guru and sits and hears the Truth from the guru
and reflects over it and assimilates the truth, till it becomes one
with him; and the truth is usually said in terms of these formulas.
But these formulas that we repeat are supposed to be realized. Has
this perhaps some validity?
Krishnaji: Sir, if you have read none of these - Patanjali,
Sankara, Chan Upanishads, Raja Yoga, Karma Yoga, Bhakti Yoga,
Gnana Yoga, nothing - what would you do?
Swamiji: I shall have to find out.
Krishnaji: What would you do?
Swamiji: Struggle.
Krishnaji: Which you are doing anyhow. What would you do?
Where would you start? - knowing nothing about what others have
said, including what the Communist leaders have said - Marx,
Engels, Lenin, Stalin. I haven't read a thing, I don't want to. I am
here, an ordinary human being. Where am I to begin? I have to
work, Karma Yoga, in a garden, as a cook, in a factory, an office, I
have to work. And also there are the wife and children: I love, I
hate, am a sexual addict, because that is the only escape offered to
me in life. Here I am. That is my map of life and I start from here. I
cannot start from over there; I start here and I ask myself what it is
all about. I know nothing about God. They can invent, pretend: I
have a horror of pretending. If I do not know, I do not know. I am
not going to quote Sankara, Buddha, or anybody. So I say: this is

where I start. Can I bring about order in my life? - order, not
invented by me or by them, but order that is virtue. Can I bring it
about? And to be virtuous there must be no battle, no conflict in me
or outside. Therefore, there must be no aggressiveness, no
violence, no hate, no animosity. I start from there. And I find out I
am afraid. I must be free of fear. To be conscious of it is to be
aware of all this, aware of where I am; from there I will move, I
shall work. And then I find out I can be alone - not carry all the
burdens of memory, of Sankaras, of Buddhas, Marx, Engels. You
follow? I can be alone because I have understood order in my life;
and I have understood order because I have denied disorder,
because I have learnt about disorder. Disorder means conflict,
acceptance of authority, complying, imitation, all that. That is
disorder, the social morality is disorder. Out of that I will bring
order in myself; not myself as a petty little human being in a
backyard, but as a Human Being.
Swamiji: How do you explain it?
Krishnaji: It is a human being who is going through this hell.
Every human being is going through this hell. So if I, as a human
being, understand this, I have discovered something which all
human beings can discover.
Swamiji: But how does one know that one is not deceiving
oneself?
Krishnaji: Very simple. First, humility: I do not want to achieve
anything.
Swamiji: I do not know if you have come across people who
say, "I am the humblest person in the world."
Krishnaji: I know. That is all too silly. Not to desire

achievement is not.
Swamiji: When one is in it, in the soup, how does one know?
Krishnaji: Of course you will know. When your desire says, "I
must be like Mr Smith who is the Prime Minister, the General, or
the Executive Officer", then there is the beginning of arrogance,
pride, achievement. I know when I want to be like the hero, when I
want to become like the Buddha, when I want to reach
enlightenment, when desire says, "Be something." Desire says in
being something there is tremendous pleasure.
Swamiji: But have we still tackled the root of the problem in all
this?
Krishnaji: Of course we have. 'Me' is the root of the problem.
Self-centredness is the root of the problem.
Swamiji: But what is it? What does it mean?
Krishnaji: Self-centredness? I am more important than you, my
house, my property, my achievement, 'me' first.
Swamiji: But the martyr may say, "I am nothing; I can be shot."
Krishnaji: Who? No, they don't. They are silly to be shot.
Swamiji: They may say they are completely unselfish, selfless.
Krishnaji: No sir, I am not interested in what somebody else
says.
Swamiji: He may be bluffing himself.
Krishnaji: As long as I am quite clear in myself, I am not
deceiving myself. I can deceive myself the moment I have a
measure. When I compare myself with the man with a RollsRoyce, or with the Buddha, or with Marx. Comparing myself with
somebody is the beginning of illusion. When I do not compare,
why should I, I move from there.

Swamiji: To be the Self?
Krishnaji: Whatever I am; which is: I am ugly, I am full of
anger, deception, fear, this and that. I start from there and see if it
is at all possible to be free of all this. Without that my thinking
about God is like thinking about climbing those hills, which I never
will.
Swamiji: But even so you said something very interesting the
other day: the individual and the collective are one. How does the
individual realize that unity with the collective?
Krishnaji: But that is a fact. Here I am living in Gstaad;
somebody is living in India, he has the same problem, the same
anxiety, the same fear, only different expressions but the root of
the thing is the same. That is one point. Second, the environment
has produced this individuality and the individuality has created
the environment. My greed has created this rotten society. My
anger, my hatred, the fragmentation of my life has created the
nation and all this mess. So I am the world, the world is me.
Logically, intellectually, verbally, it is so.
Swamiji: But how does one feel it?
Krishnaji: That comes only when you change. When you
change, you are no longer a national. You do not belong to
anything.
Swamiji: Mentally I may say I am not a Hindu, or I am not an
Indian.
Krishnaji: But, sir, that is just a trick. You must feel it in your
blood.
Swamiji: Please explain what that means.
Krishnaji: It means, sir, when you see the danger of nationalism,

you are out of it. When you see the danger of fragmentation, you
no longer belong to the fragment. We do not see the danger of it.
That is all.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
IV CHAPTER 2 2ND CONVERSATION WITH
SWAMI VENKATESANANDA SAANEN 26TH
JULY 1969 FOUR"MAHAVAKYAS"FROM THE
UPANISHADS DISCUSSED. COMMUNICATION
AND THE BODHISATTVA IDEAL. VEDANTA
AND THE ENDING OF KNOWLEDGE
Swami Venkatesananda: Krishnaji, we are sitting near each other
and enquiring, listening and learning. Even so did the sage and the
seeker, and that is the origin they say of the Upanishads. These
Upanishads contain what are known as Mahavakyas, Great
Sayings, which perhaps had the same effect upon the seeker then as
your words have upon me now. May I beg of you to say what you
think of them, are they still valid, or do they need revision or
renewal?
The Upanishads envisaged the Truth in the following
Mahavakyas:
Prajnanam Brahma: "Consciousness is infinite, the absolute, the
highest Truth."
Aham Brahmasmi: "I am that infinite", or "I is that infinite" because the "I" here does not refer to the ego.
Tat Tvam-asi: "Thou art that".
Ayam Atma Brahma: "The self is the infinite", or "the
individual is the infinite."
These were the four Mahavakyas used by the ancient sage to
bring home the message to the student, and they were also sitting
just like us, face to face, the guru and the disciple, the sage and the
seeker.

Krishnaji: Yes, what is the question, Sir?
Swamiji: What do you think of them? Are these Mahavakyas
valid now? Do they need a revision or a renewal?
Krishnaji: These sayings, like "I am that", "Tat Tvam-asi" and
"Ayam Atma Brahma"? Swamiji: That is, "Consciousness is
Brahman".
Krishnaji: Isn't there a danger, Sir, of repeating something not
knowing what it means? "I am that." What does it actually mean?
Swamiji: "Thou are that."
Krishnaji: Thou art that." What does that mean? One can say, "I
am the river". That river that has got tremendous volume behind it,
moving, restless, pushing on and on, through many countries. I can
say, "I am that river." That would be equally valid as, "I am
Brahman."
Swamiji: Yes. Yes.
Krishnaji: Why do we say, "I am that"? And not "I am the
river", nor "I am the poor man", the man that has no capacity, no
intelligence, who is dull - this dullness brought about by heredity,
by poverty, by degradation, all that! Why don't we say, "I am that
also"? Why do we always attach ourselves to something which we
suppose to be the highest?
Swamiji: "That", perhaps, only means that which is
unconditioned.
YO VAI BHUMA TATSUKHAM
That which is unconditioned.
Krishnaji: Unconditioned, yes.
Swamiji: So, since there is in us this urge to break through all
conditioning, we look for the unconditioned.

Krishnaji: Can a conditioned mind, can a mind that is small,
petty, narrow, living on superficial entertainments, can that know
or conceive, or understand, or feel, or observe the unconditioned?
Swamiji: No. But it can uncondition itself.
Krishnaji: That is all it can do.
Swamiji: Yes. Krishnaji: Not say, "There is the unconditioned, I
am going to think about it", or "I am that". My point is, why is it
that we always associate ourselves with what we think is the
highest? Not what we think is the lowest?
Swamiji: Perhaps in Brahman there is no division between the
highest and the lowest, that which is unconditioned.
Krishnaji: That's the point. When you say, "I am that", or "Thou
are that", there is a statement of a supposed fact....
Swamiji: Yes.
Krishnaji: ...which may not be a fact at all.
Swamiji: Perhaps I should explain here again that the sage who
uttered the Mahavakyas was believed to have had a direct
experience of it.
Krishnaji: Now, if he had the experience of it, could he convey
it to another?
Swamiji: (Laughs)
Krishnaji: And the question also arises, can one actually
experience something which is not experienceable? We use the
word "experience" so easily - "realise", "experience", "attain", "selfrealisation", all these things - can one actually experience the
feeling of supreme ecstasy? Let's take that for the moment, that
word. Can one experience it?
Swamiji: The infinite?

Krishnaji: Can one experience the infinite? This is really quite a
fundamental question, not only here but in life. We can experience
something which we have already known. I experience meeting
you. That's an experience, meeting you, or you meeting me, or my
meeting X. And when I meet you next time I recognise you, don't
I? I say, "Yes, I met him at Gstaad." So there is in experience the
factor of recognition.
Swamiji: Yes. That is objective experience.
Krishnaji: If I hadn't met you, I should pass you by - you would
pass me by. There is in all experiencing, isn't there, a factor of
recognition?
Swamiji: Possibly.
Krishnaji: Otherwise it is not an experience. I meet you - is that
an experience?
Swamiji: Objective experience.
Krishnaji: It can be an experience, can't it? I meet you for the
first time. Then what takes place in that first meeting of two
people. What takes place?
Swamiji: An impression, impression of like.
Krishnaji: An impression of like or dislike, such as, "He's a very
intelligent man", or "He's a stupid man", or "He should be this or
that". It is all based on my background of judgment, on my values,
on my prejudices, likes and dislikes, on my bias, on my
conditioning. That background meets you and judges you. The
judgment, the evaluation, is what we call experience.
Swamiji: But isn't there, Krishnaji, another... ?
Krishnaji: Wait, Sir, let me finish this. Experience is after all the
response to a challenge, isn't it? The reaction to a challenge. I meet

you and I react. If I didn't react at all, with any sense of like,
dislike, prejudice, what would take place?
Swamiji: Yes?
Krishnaji: What would happen in a relationship in which the
one - you, perhaps - have no prejudice, no reaction; you are living
in quite a different state and you meet me. Then what takes place?
Swamiji: Peace.
Krishnaji: I must recognise that peace in you, that quality in
you, otherwise I just pass you by. So when we say, "Experience the
highest", can the mind, which is conditioned, which is prejudiced,
frightened, experience the highest?
Swamiji: Obviously not. Krishnaji: Obviously not. And the fear,
the prejudice, the excitement, the stupidity is the entity that says, "I
am going to experience the highest." When that stupidity, fear,
anxiety, conditioning ceases, is there experiencing of the highest at
all?
Swamiji: Experiencing of "that".
Krishnaji: No, I haven't made myself clear. If the entity - which
is the fear, the anxiety, the guilt and all the rest of it - if that entity
has dissolved itself, discarded the fear and so on, what is there to
experience?
Swamiji: Now that beautiful question was actually put in just so
many words. He asked the very same question:
VIJNATARAM ARE KENA VIJANIYAT
"You are the knower, how can you know the knower?" "You
are the experiences!" But there is one suggestion that Vedanta
gives and that is: we have so far been talking about an objective
experience:

PAROKSANUBHUTI
Isn't there another experience? Not my meeting X Y Z, but the
feeling "I am", which is not because I encountered desire
somewhere, or because I was confronted with some desire. I don't
go and ask a doctor or somebody to certify that "I am". But there is
this feeling, there is this knowledge, "I am". This experience seems
to be totally different from objective experience.
Krishnaji: Sir, what is the purpose of experience?
Swamiji: Exactly what you have been saying: to get rid of the
fears, and get rid of all the complexes, all the conditioning. To see
what I am, in truth, when I am not conditioned.
Krishnaji: No, Sir. I mean: I am dull.
Swamiji: Am I dull? Krishnaji: I am dull; and because I see you,
or X Y Z, who is very bright, very intelligent..?
Swamiji: There is comparison.
Krishnaji: Comparison: through comparing, I find that I am
very dull. And I say, "Yes, I am dull, what am I to do?", and just
remain in my dullness. Life comes along, an incident takes place,
which shakes me up. I wake up for a moment and struggle struggle not to be dull, to be more intelligent, and so on. So
experience generally has the significance of waking you up, giving
you a challenge to which you have to respond. Either you respond
to it adequately, or inadequately. If it is inadequate, the response
then becomes a medium of pain, struggle, conflict. But if you
respond to it adequately, that is fully, you are the challenge. You
are the challenge, not the challenged, but you are that. Therefore
you need no challenge at all, if you are adequately responding all
the time to everything.

Swamiji: That is beautiful, but (laughing) how does one get
there?
Krishnaji: Ah, wait, Sir. Just let us see the need for experience
at all. I think it is really extraordinary, if you can go into it. Why do
human beings demand not only objective experience, which one
can understand - in going to the moon they have collected a lot of
information, a lot of data...
Swamiji: ...rocks...
Krishnaji: That kind of experience is perhaps necessary,
because it furthers knowledge, knowledge of factual, objective
things. Now apart from that kind of experience, is there any
necessity for experience at all?
Swamiji: Subjectively?
Krishnaji: Yes. I don't like to use "subjective" and "objective".
Is there the need of experience at all? We have said: experience is
the response to a challenge. I challenge you, I ask, "Why?" You
may respond to it, and say, "Yes, perfectly right, I am with you."
"Why?" But the moment there is any kind of resistance to that
question, "Why?", you are already responding inadequately. And
therefore there is conflict between us, between the challenge and
the response. Now, that's one thing. And there is a desire to
experience, let's say God, something Supreme, the highest; or the
highest happiness, the highest ecstasy, bliss, a sense of peace,
whatever you like. Can the mind experience it at all?
Swamiji: No.
Krishnaji: Then what does experience it?
Swamiji: Do you want us to enquire what the mind is?
Krishnaji: No.

Swamiji: What the "I" is?
Krishnaji: No! Why does the "I", me or you, demand
experience? - that is my point - demand the experience of the
highest, which promises happiness, or ecstasy, bliss or peace?
Swamiji: Obviously because in the present state we feel
inadequate.
Krishnaji: That's all. That's all.
Swamiji: Correct.
Krishnaji: Being in a state in which there is no peace, we want
to experience a state which is absolute, permanent, eternal peace.
Swamiji: It is not so much that I am restless, and there is a state
of peace; I want to know what is this feeling, "I am restless". Is the
"I" restless, or is the "I" dull? Am I dull, or is dullness only a
condition which I can shake off?
Krishnaji: Now who is the entity that shakes it off?
Swamiji: Wakes up. The "I" wakes up.
Krishnaji: No, Sir. That's the difficulty. Let's finish this first. I
am unhappy, miserable, laden with sorrow. And I want to
experience something where there is no sorrow. That is my
craving. I have an ideal, a goal, and by struggling towards it I will
ultimately get that. That's my craving. I want to experience that and
hold on to that experience. That is what human beings want - apart
from all the clever sayings, clever talk.
Swamiji: Yes, yes; and that is perhaps the reason why another
very great South Indian sage said (in Tamil:
ASAI ARUMIN ASAI ARUMIN
ISANODAYINUM ASAI ARUMIN
It's very good really.

Krishnaji: What's that?
Swamiji: "Cut down all these cravings. Even the craving to be
one with God, cut it down", he says.
Krishnaji: Yes, I understand. Now look, Sir. If I - if the mind can free itself from this agony, then what is the need of asking for
an experience of the Supreme? There won't be.
Swamiji: No. Certainly.
Krishnaji: It is no longer caught in its own conditioning.
Therefore it is something else; it is living in a different dimension.
Therefore the desire to experience the highest is essentially wrong.
Swamiji: If it is a desire.
Krishnaji: Whatever it is! How do I know the highest? Because
the sages have talked of it? I don't accept the sages. They might be
caught in illusion, they might be talking sense or nonsense. I don't
know; I am not interested. I find that as long as the mind is in a
state of fear, it wants to escape from it, and it projects an idea of
the Supreme, and wants to experience that. But if it frees itself
from its own agony, then it is altogether in a different state. It
doesn't even ask for the experience because it is at a different level.
Swamiji: Quite, quite. Krishnaji: Now, why do the sages,
according to what you have said, say, "You must experience that,
you must be that, you must realize that"?
Swamiji: They didn't say, "You must"...
Krishnaji: Put it any way you like. Why should they say all
these things? Would it not be better to say, "Look here, my friends,
get rid of your fear. Get rid of your beastly antagonism, get rid of
your childishness, and when you have done that..."
Swamiji: ...nothing more remains.

Krishnaji: Nothing more. You'll find out the beauty of it. You
don't have to ask, then.
Swamiji: Fantastic, fantastic!
Krishnaji: You see, Sir, the other way is such a hypocritical
state; it leads to hypocrisy. "I am seeking God", but I am all the
time kicking people. (Laughs)
Swamiji: Yes, that could be hypocrisy.
Krishnaji: It is, it is.
Swamiji: That leads me on to the last and perhaps very
impertinent question.
Krishnaji: No, Sir, there is no impertinence.
Swamiji: I am neither flattering you, nor insulting you,
Krishnaji, when I say that it is a great experience to sit near you
and talk to you like this. Your message is great, and you have been
talking for over forty years of things you have considered very
important to man. Now three questions. Do you think a man can
communicate it to another man? Do you think that others can
communicate it to still others? If so, how?
Krishnaji: Communicate what, Sir?
Swamiji: This message, that you have dedicated your life to.
What would you call it? - You may call it message. Krishnaji: Yes,
call it what you like, it doesn't matter. Am I - the person who is
speaking, is he conveying a message, telling you a message?
Swamiji: No. You may call it an awakening, a questioning...
Krishnaji: No no. I am asking, Sir. Just look at it.
Swamiji: I guess we feel so, the listeners...
Krishnaji: What is he saying? He says, "Look, look at yourself."
Swamiji: Exactly.

Krishnaji: Nothing more.
Swamiji: Nothing more is necessary.
Krishnaji: Nothing more is necessary. Look at yourself.
Observe yourself. Go into yourself, because in this state as we are,
we will create a monstrous world. You may go to the Moon, you
may go further, to Venus, Mars and all the rest of it, but you will
always carry yourself over there. Change yourself first! Change
yourself - not first - change yourself. Therefore to change, look at
yourself, go into yourself - observe, listen, learn. That's not a
message. You can do it yourself if you want to.
Swamiji: But somebody has to tell...
Krishnaji: I am telling you. I say, "Look, look at this marvellous
tree; look at this beautiful African flower."
Swamiji: Till you said that, I hadn't looked at it.
Krishnaji: Ah! Why?
Swamiji: (Laughs)
Krishnaji: Why? It is there, round you.
Swamiji: Yes.
Krishnaji: Why didn't you look?
Swamiji: There could be a thousand answers. Krishnaji: No, no.
I asked you to look at that flower. By my asking you to look at that
flower, do you look at that flower?
Swamiji: I have the opportunity, yes.
Krishnaji: No. Do you really look at that flower because
somebody asks you to look?
Swamiji: No.
Krishnaji : No, you can't. That's just it. I say to you, You are
hungry." Are you hungry because I say it?

Swamiji: No.
Krishnaji: You know when you are hungry, and yet you want
somebody to tell you to look at the flower.
Swamiji: I may know when I am hungry, but it is the mother
that tells me where the food is.
Krishnaji: No, no. We're not talking about where the food is, but
we are saying "hunger". You know when you're hungry. But why
should somebody tell you to look at a flower?
Swamiji: Because I am not hungry to look at the flower.
Krishnaji: Why not?
Swamiji: I am satisfied with something else.
Krishnaji: No. Why aren't you looking at that flower? I think
first of all nature has no value at all for most of us. We say, "Well,
I can see the tree any time I want to." That's one thing. Also, we
are so concentrated upon our own worries, our own hopes, our own
desires and experiences, that we shut ourselves in a cage of our
own thinking; and we don't look beyond it. He says, "Don't do that.
Look at everything and through looking at everything you'll
discover your cage." That's all.
Swamiji: Isn't that a message?
Krishnaji: It is not a message in the sense...
Swamiji: No.
Krishnaji: It doesn't matter what you call it - call it a message.
All right. I tell you that. You play with it, or take it very seriously.
And if it is very serious for you, you naturally tell it to somebody
else. You don't have to say, "I am going to make propaganda about
it..."
Swamiji: No, no.

Krishnaji: You will say, "Look at the beauty of those flowers."
Swamiji: Yes.
Krishnaji: You say that. And the person doesn't listen to you.
And there it is - finished! So is propaganda necessary?
Swamiji: Propagation, Sir.
Krishnaji: Yes, propagation, that is the word - propagate.
Swamiji: Yes. We are talking about these forty years of
talking...
Krishnaji: ...more than forty years...
Swamiji: Yes, millions of people have been talking for
centuries, wasting their...
Krishnaji: We have been talking, yes. We have been
propagating...
Swamiji: ...something which is extremely important, which I'm
sure you consider is extremely important.
Krishnaji: Otherwise I wouldn't go on.
Swamiji: I have read some of the books you have published, but
this experience of sitting and talking to you...
Krishnaji: ...is different from reading a book.
Swamiji: Completely, completely, different!
Krishnaji: I agree.
Swamiji: Last night I read one and there was a little more
meaning. How does one bring that about?
Krishnaji: You are a serious person, and the other person being
serious there is a contact, there is a relationship, there is a coming
together in seriousness. But if you're not serious, you will just say,
"Well, it's very nice talking about all these things, but what's it all
about?" - and walk off.

Swamiji: Yes.
Krishnaji: Surely, Sir, with any kind of relationship that has
meaning there must be a meeting at the same level, at the same
time, with the same intensity, otherwise there is no communication,
there is no relationship. And perhaps that's what takes place when
we are sitting together here. Because one feels the urgency of
something and the intensity of it, there is a relationship established
which is quite different from reading a book.
Swamiji: A book has no life.
Krishnaji: Printed words have no life, but you can give life to
the printed word if you are serious.
Swamiji: So how does it go on from there?
Krishnaji: From there you say, is it possible to convey to others
this quality of urgency, this quality of intensity, and action which
takes place now?
Swamiji: ...really now...
Krishnaji: Yes, not tomorrow or yesterday.
Swamiji: Action, which means observation at the same level.
Krishnaji: And is always functioning - seeing and acting,
seeing, acting, seeing, acting.
Swamiji: Yes.
Krishnaji: How is this to take place? First of all, Sir, most
people, as we said yesterday, are not interested in all this. They
play with it. There are very, very few really serious people. Ninetyfive per cent say, "Well, if you are entertaining it's all right, but if
you are not, you're not welcome" - entertainment, according to
their idea of entertainment. Then what will you do? Knowing there
are only very, very few people in the world who are really

desperately serious, what will you do? You talk to them, and you
talk to the people who want to be entertained. But you don't care
whether they listen to you or don't listen.
Swamiji: Thank you. Thank you.
Krishnaji: I don't say, "To the people who need crutches, offer
crutches!"
Swamiji: No.
Krishnaji: Nor to the people who want comfort, an avenue of
escape, "Go away somewhere else..."
Swamiji: ...to the Palace Hotel!...
Krishnaji: I think, Sir, that is perhaps what has taken place in all
these religions, all the so-called teachers. They have said, "I must
help this man, that man, that other man.',
Swamiji: Yes?
Krishnaji: The ignorant, the semi-ignorant, and the very
intelligent. Each must have his particular form of food. They may
have said that; I am not concerned. I just offer the flower, let them
smell it, let them destroy it, let them cook it, let them tear it to
pieces. I have nothing to do with it.
Swamiji: Well, they glorify that other attitude, the Bodhisattva
ideal.
Krishnaji: Again, the Bodhisattva ideal - is it not an invention of
our own, the desperate hope, desire for some kind of solace? The
Maitreya Bodhisattva, the idea that He has relinquished the
ultimate in life, enlightenment, and is waiting for all humanity...
Swamiji: Thank you.
***
Krishnaji: What is Vedanta?

Swamiji: The word means, "The end of the Vedas".... Not in the
manner of "full stop".
Krishnaji: The end of all knowledge.
Swamiji: Quite right, quite right. Yes, the end of knowledge;
where knowledge matters no more. Krishnaji: Therefore, leave it.
Swamiji: Yes.
Krishnaji: Why proceed from there to describe what it is not?
Swamiji: As I've been sitting and listening to you, I've thought
of another sage who is reported to have gone to another greater
one. And he says, "Look my mind is restless; please tell me what
must I do." And the older man says, "Give me a list of what you
know already, so that I can proceed from there." He replies, "Oh, it
will take a long time, because I have all the formulas, all the
shastras, all of that." The sage answers, "But that's only a set of
words. All those words are contained in the dictionary, it means
nothing. Now what do you know?" He says, "That is what I know.
I don't know anything else."
Krishnaji: Vedanta, as it says, means the end of knowledge.
Swamiji: Yes, it's wonderful, I never heard it put that way
before. "The end of knowledge."
Krishnaji: Freedom from knowledge.
Swamiji: Yes indeed.
Krishnaji: Then why have they not kept to that?
Swamiji: Their contention is that you have to pass through it in
order to come out of it.
Krishnaji: Pass through what?
Swamiji: Through all this knowledge, all this muck, and then
discard it.

PARIVEDYA LOKAN LOKAJITAN
BRAHMANO NIRVEDAMAYAT
That is, "After examining all these things and finding that they
are of no use to you, then you must step out of it." Krishnaji: Then
why must I acquire it? If Vedanta means the end of knowledge,
which the word itself means, the ending of Vedas, which is
knowledge - then why should I go through all the laborious process
of acquiring knowledge, and then discarding it?
Swamiji: Otherwise you wouldn't be in Vedanta. The end of
knowledge is, having acquired this knowledge, coming to the end
of it.
Krishnaji: Why should I acquire it?
Swamiji: Well, so that it can be ended.
Krishnaji: No, no. Why should I acquire it? Why should not I,
from the very beginning, see what knowledge is and discard it?
Swamiji: See what knowledge is?
Krishnaji: And discard, discard all that: never accumulate.
Vedanta means the end of accumulating knowledge.
Swamiji: That's it. That's correct.
Krishnaji: Then why should I accumulate?
Swamiji: Pass through, perhaps.
Krishnaji: Pass through? Why should I? I know fire burns. I
know when I am hungry, when I must eat. I know I mustn't hit you;
I don't hit you. I don't go through the process of hitting you,
acquiring the knowledge that I'll be hurt again. So each day I
discard. I free myself from what I have learnt, every minute. So
every minute is the end of knowledge.
Swamiji: Yes, right.

Krishnaji: Now you and I accept that, that is a fact, that's the
only way to live - otherwise you can't live. Then why have they
said, "You must go through all the knowledge, through all this?"
Why don't they tell me, "Look my friend, as you live from day to
day acquiring knowledge, end it each day"? Not "Vedanta says so
and so".
Swamiji: No, no. Krishnaji: Live it!
Swamiji: Quite right. Again this division, classification.
Krishnaji: That's just it. We are back again.
Swamiji: Back again.
Krishnaji: We're back again to a fragment - a fragmentation of
life.
Swamiji: Yes. But I'm too dull, I can't get there; so I'd rather
acquire all this...
Krishnaji: Yes, and then discard it.
Swamiji: In the religious or spiritual history of India, there have
been sages who were born sages: the Ramana Maharishi, the Shuka
Maharishi, etc. etc. Well, they were allowed to discard knowledge
even before acquiring it. And in their cases of course, the usual
argument was that they had done it all...
Krishnaji: In their past lives.
Swamiji: Past lives.
Krishnaji: No, Sir, apart from the acquiring of knowledge and
the ending of knowledge, what does Vedanta say?
Swamiji: Vedanta describes the relationship between the
individual and the Cosmic.
Krishnaji: The Eternal.
Swamiji: The Cosmic, or the Infinite, or whatever it is. It starts

well:
ISAVASYAM IDAM SARVAM
YAT KIMCHA JAGATYAM JAGAT
"Till the whole universe is pervaded by that one..."
Krishnaji: That one thing...
Swamiji: ...and so on. And then it's mostly this, a dialogue
between a master and his disciple. Krishnaji: Sir, isn't it
extraordinary, there has always been in India this teacher and
disciple, teacher and disciple?
Swamiji: Yes - Guru.
Krishnaji: But they never said, "You are the teacher as well as
the pupil."
Swamiji: Occasionally they did.
Krishnaji: But always with hesitation, with apprehension. But
why? - if the fact is, you are the teacher and you are the pupil.
Otherwise you are lost, if you depend on anybody else. That's one
fact. And also I would like to ask why, in songs, in Hindu
literature, they have praised the beauty of nature, the trees, the
flowers, the rivers, the birds. Why is it most people in India have
no feeling for all that?
Swamiji: Because they are dead?
Krishnaji: Why? And yet they talk about the beauty, the
literature, they quote Sanskrit, and Sanskrit itself is the most
beautiful language.
Swamiji: They have no feeling for...
Krishnaji: And they have no feeling for the poor man.
Swamiji: Yes, that is the worst tragedy of all.
Krishnaji: Nor for the squalor, the dirt.

Swamiji: And heaven knows from where they got this idea
because it is not found in any of the scriptures. That means we are
repeating the scriptures without realizing their meaning.
Krishnaji: That's it.
Swamiji: Krishna:
Ishwara SARVABHUTANAM
HRIDDESSERJUNA TISTHATI
"I am seated in the hearts of all beings." Nobody bothers about
the hearts of all beings. What would you think is the cause? They
repeat it daily, every morning they are asked to repeat a chapter of
the Bhagavad Gita.
Krishnaji: Every morning they do Puja and the repetition of
things.
Swamiji: Now why have they lost the meaning? Obviously
great meaning was put into those words by the authors. We are
even asked to repeat them every day in order that we might keep
them...
Krishnaji: Alive.
Swamiji: Keep them alive. When and how did I kill the spirit?
How was it possible? How to prevent it?
Krishnaji: What do you think is the reason, Sir? No, you know
India better.
Swamiji: I am shocked at it.
Krishnaji: Why do you think it happens? Is it over population?
Swamiji: No, overpopulation is a result, not the cause.
Krishnaji: Yes. Is it that they have accepted this tradition, this
authority...
Swamiji: But the tradition says something good.

Krishnaji: But they have accepted it. They never questioned it.
Sir, I have seen M.A.s and B.A.s in India, who have passed
degrees, are clever, brainy - but they wouldn't know how to put a
flower on a table. They know nothing but memory, memory, the
cultivation of memory. Isn't that one of the causes?
Swamiji: Perhaps. Mere memorizing.
Krishnaji: Memorizing everything.
Swamiji: Without thinking. Why does man refuse to think?
Krishnaji: Oh, that's different - indolence, fear, wanting always
to tread in the traditional path so that he doesn't go wrong.
Swamiji: But we have discarded the tradition which they say didn't
suit us.
Krishnaji: Of course. But we find a new tradition that suits us we are safe.
Swamiji: We never felt that the healthy tradition is a good
tradition to keep.
Krishnaji: Throw out all tradition! Let's find out, Sir, whether
these teachers and gurus and sages, have really helped people. Has
Marx really helped people?
Swamiji: No.
Krishnaji: They have imposed their ideas on them.
Swamiji: And others have used the same ideas...
Krishnaji: Therefore I question this whole thing, because they
are really not concerned with people's happiness.
Swamiji: Though they say so.
Krishnaji: If the Marxists and all those Soviet leaders are really
interested in the people then there would be no concentration
camps. There would be freedom. There would be no repressive

measures.
Swamiji: But I suppose they think, we have to imprison the
lunatics...
Krishnaji: That's it. The lunatic is a man who questions my
authority.
Swamiji: Yesterday's ruler might be today's lunatic.
Krishnaji: That always happens, that's inevitable, that's why I'm
asking, whether it's not important to make man, a human being,
realize that he's solely responsible.
Swamiji: Each one.
Krishnaji: Absolutely! For what he does, what he thinks, how
he acts. Otherwise we end up in this memorizing, and complete
blindness.
Swamiji: That is your message. And how to nail it? Krishnaji:
By driving it in every day (laughs). And driving it into oneself.
Because man is so eager to put his responsibility on others. The
army is the safest escape - you're told what to do. You don't have
any responsibility. It's all been thought out, what you should do,
how you should think, act, carry your gun, how you should shoot and finished! They provide you with a meal, sleeping-quarters, and
for sex you can go to the village. That's the end of it. And strangely
they talk about Karma.
Swamiji: That is Karma. PRARABDHA KARMA
Krishnaji: They insist on Karma.
Swamiji: That is Karma - I was a Brahmin, and I know what
happened. We played with that Karma and then it came back on us.
Krishnaji: Playing havoc now in India.
Swamiji: We toyed with the idea of Karma and we said: it's

your Karma, you must suffer. My Karma is good and so I'm
divorced from it all; I'm the landlord. And now they have turned
the tables.
Krishnaji: Quite.
Swamiji: A vegetarian - she's a fanatical vegetarian - asked me,
"Is pure vegetarianism necessary for yoga practice?" I said, "Not so
important. Let's talk about something else." And she was horrified.
She came back to me and said, "How can you say that? You can't
say that vegetarianism is of secondary value. You must say it's of
primary value." I replied, "Forgive me - I said something, but it
doesn't matter." I then asked her, "Do you believe in war, defence
forces, defending your country and so on?" "Yes," she said,
"otherwise how can we live - we have to." I replied, "If I call you a
cannibal, how do you react to that? This man kills a small animal
to sustain his life, but you are willing to kill people to sustain
yours. Like a cannibal." She didn't like that - but I think she saw
the point later. Krishnaji: Good.
Swamiji: It's so fantastic. People don't want to think. And I
suppose with you, Krishnaji, if you say the truth, you become very
unpopular. A priest said:
APRIYASYA TU PATHYASYA VAKTA Shrota NA
VIDYATE
Very beautiful! "People love to hear pleasant things; pleasant to
say and pleasant to hear."

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART V
CHAPTER 1 1ST PUBLIC TALK MADRAS 3RD
JANUARY 1968 'THE ART OF SEEING'
WE WERE SAYING the other day how very important it is to
observe. It is quite an art to which one must give a great deal of
attention. We only see very partially, we never see anything
completely, with the totality of our mind, or with the fullness of
our heart. And unless we learn this extraordinary art, it seems to
me that we shall be functioning, living, through a very small part of
our mind, through a small segment of the brain. We never see
anything completely, for various reasons, because we are so
concerned with our own problems, or we are so conditioned, so
heavily burdened with belief, with tradition, with the past, that this
actually prevents us from seeing or listening. We never see a tree,
we see the tree through the image that we have of it, the concept of
that tree; but the concept, the knowledge, the experience, is entirely
different from the actual tree. Here one is surrounded by a great
many trees, fortunately, and if you look around you, as the speaker
is going on with the subject of seeing, if you actually look at it, you
will find how extraordinary difficult it is to see it all, so that no
image, no screen, comes between the seeing and the actual fact.
Please do this, don't watch me - look at the tree, find out whether
you can see it completely. By completely I mean with the totality
of your mind and heart, not a fragment of it, because what we are
going to go into this evening demands such observation, such
seeing. Unless you actually do this (not theorize, intellectualise or
bring up various issues which are irrelevant) I am afraid you will

not be able to follow closely what we are going to go over together.
We never see, or actually hear, what another is saying; we are
either emotional, sentimental or very intellectual - which,
obviously prevents us from actually seeing the colour, the beauty
of the light, the trees, the birds, and from listening to those crows;
we never are in direct relationship with any of this. And I doubt
very much if we are in relationship with anything, even with our
own ideas, thoughts, motives, impressions; there is always the
image which is observing, even when we observe ourselves.
So it is very important to understand that the act of seeing is the
only truth; there is nothing else. If I know how to see a tree, or a
bird, or a lovely face, or the smile of a child - there it is, I don't
have to do anything more. But that seeing of the bird, of the leaf,
listening to the noise of birds, becomes almost impossible because
of the image that one has built, not only about nature but also about
others. And these images actually prevent us from seeing and
feeling; feeling being entirely different from sentimentality and
emotion.
And, as we said, we see everything fragmentarily and we are
trained from childhood to look, to observe, to learn, to live in a
fragment. And there is the vast expanse of the mind which we
never touch or know; that mind is vast, immeasurable, but we
never touch it, we don't know the quality of it because we have
never looked at anything completely, with the totality of our mind,
of our heart, of our nerves, of our eyes, of our ears. To us the word,
the concept is extraordinarily important, not the acts of seeing and
doing. But having the concept, which is a belief, an idea - having
this - conceptual living, prevents us from actually seeing, doing;

and therefore we say we have problems of action, of what to do or
not to do, and the conflict that arises between the act and the
concept.
Do please observe what I am talking about, not merely hear the
words of the speaker, but observe yourselves, using the speaker as
a mirror in which you can see yourself. What the speaker has to say
is of very little importance, and the speaker himself is of no
importance whatsoever, but what you gather out of observing
yourself is important. It is so because there must be a total
revolution, a complete mutation in our minds, in our way of living,
in our feeling, in the activities of our daily life. And to bring about
such fundamental, deep revolution is only possible when we know
how to look; because when you do look, you are not only looking
with your eyes but you are also looking with your mind. I do not
know if you have ever driven a car; if you have, you are not only
visually aware of the approaching car, but your mind is far ahead
watching the bend of the road, the side road, other cars coming and
going. And this seeing is not only seeing through your eyes and
nerves, but seeing with your heart, with your mind, and you cannot
see completely in this way if you are living, functioning, thinking,
acting within a fragment of the total mind.
Look what is happening in the world - we are being conditioned
by society, by the culture in which we live, and that culture is the
product of man - there is nothing holy, or divine, or eternal about
culture. Culture, society, books, radios, all that we listen to and see,
the many influences of which we are either conscious or
unconscious, all these encourage us to live within a very small
fragment of the vast field of the mind. You go through school,

college, and learn a technique to earn a living; for the next forty or
fifty years you spend your life, your time, your energy, your
thought, in that specialized little field. And there is the vast field of
the mind. Unless we bring about a radical change in this
fragmentation there can be no revolution at all; there will be
modifications, economic, social and so-called cultural but man will
go on suffering, will go on in conflict, in war, in misery, in sorrow
and in despair.
I do not know if you read some time ago how one of the
Marshals of the Russian army reporting to the Polit Bureau, said
that in the army they were training soldiers under hypnosis - you
know what that means? You are put under hypnosis and taught
how to kill, how to obey completely, function with complete
independence, but within a pattern, under the authority of a
superior. Now culture and society are doing exactly the same thing
to each one of us. Culture and society have hypnotized you. Do
please listen to this very carefully, it is not only being done in the
army in Russia, but it is being done all over the world. When you
read the Gita endlessly, or the Koran, or repeat some mantram,
some endlessly repeated words, you are doing exactly the same
thing. When you say, "I am a Hindu", "I am a Buddhist", "I am a
Muslim", "I am a Catholic", the same pattern is being repeated, you
have been mesmerized, hypnotized; and technology is doing
exactly the same thing. You can be a clever lawyer, a first-class
engineer, or an artist, or a great scientist, but always within a
fragment of the whole. I do not know if you see this, not because I
describe it, but actually see what is taking place. The Communists
are doing it, the Capitalists are doing it, everybody, parents,

schools, education, they are all shaping the mind to function within
a certain pattern, a certain fragment. And we are always concerned
with bringing about a change within the pattern, within the
fragment.
So, how is one to realize this, not theoretically, not as a mere
idea, but see the actuality of it - you understand, see the actual?
The actual being what is everyday taking place and is spoken of in
newspapers, by politicians, through culture and tradition, in the
family, making you call yourselves Indians, or whatever you think
you are. Then when you see, you must question yourself (I am sure
you would if you saw it), and that is why it is very important to
understand how you see. If you really saw it, then the question
would be, "How can the total mind act?" (I do not mean the
fragment, not the conditioned mind, nor the educated, sophisticated
mind, the mind that is afraid, the mind that says, "there is God" or
"there is no God", "there is my family, your family, my nation,
your nation".) Then you will ask, "How can this totality of the
mind be, how can it function completely, even while learning a
technique?" Though it has to learn a technique and to live in
relationship with others, in our present disordered society - bearing
that in mind, one must ask this question, which is a fundamental
one: "How can this totality of the mind be made completely
sensitive, so that even the fragment becomes sensitive?" I don't
know if you have understood my question, we shall come to it in
another way.
At present we are not sensitive; there are spots in this field that
are sensitive, sensitive when our particular personality, our
particular idiosyncracy, or our particular pleasures are denied -

then there is a battle. We are sensitive in fragments, in spots, but
we are not sensitive completely; so the question is, "How can the
fragment, which is part of the total, which is being made dull every
day by repetition, how can that part also be made sensitive as well
as the total?" Is this question fairly clear? Do tell me.
Perhaps this is a new question to you, probably you have never
asked yourself about it. Because we are all satisfied to live with as
little trouble and conflict as possible, in that little part of that field
which is our life, appraising the marvellous culture of that little
part as opposed to other cultures, Western, ancient or any other.
We are not even aware what the implications of this are - of living
in a tiny fragment, a corner of a very vast field. We don't see for
ourselves how deeply we are concerned with the little part, and we
are trying to find answers to the problem within that fragment,
within that little corner of this vast life. We ask ourselves, how can
the mind (which is now half asleep in this vast field, because we
are only concerned with the little part), how can we become totally
aware of this whole thing, become completely sensitive?
Now, first of all there is no method. Because any method,
system, repetition or habit, is essentially part of the corner of that
field. (Are we travelling together, taking a journey together, or are
you falling behind?) The first thing is to see the actual fact of the
little corner and what its demands are. Then we can put the
question, "How can we make the whole field completely
sensitive?", because in that lies the only true revolution. When
there is total sensitivity of the whole of the mind, then we will act
differently; our thinking, feeling, will be wholly of a different
dimension. But there is no method. Don't say, "How am I to arrive,

achieve, become sensitive?" - you can't go to college to become
sensitive, you can't read books or be told what to do to become
sensitive. This is what you have been doing within that corner of
the field, and it has made you more and more insensitive, which
can be seen in your daily life, with its callousness, brutality, and
violence. (I do not know if you have seen the pictures in magazines
of the American and Vietnamese soldiers being wounded. You
may see it and say, "I am so sorry", but it has not happened to you,
not to your family, not to your son.) So we become callous because
we are functioning, living, acting, within the small petty little
corner of a distorted field.
There is no method. Please do realize this, because when you
realize it, you are free of the enormous weight of all authority, and
so free of the past. I don't know if you see this. The past is implicit
in our culture, which we think is so wonderful (the tradition, the
beliefs, the memories, the obedience to it), and all that is put aside
completely, forever, when you realize there is no method of any
kind to bring freedom from the "little corner". But you have to
learn all about the little corner. Then you are free of the burden
which makes you insensitive. Soldiers are trained to kill, practise
day after day, day after day, ruthlessly, so that they have no human
feeling left at all. And that is the type of thing which is being done
to each one of us every day, all the time, by newspapers, by
political leaders, by the gurus, by the Pope, by the bishops,
everywhere, all over the world.
Now, as there is no method, what is one to do? Method implies
practice, dependence, your method, my method, his path and
another's path, my guru who knows a little better, this guru who is

phoney, that guru who is not (but all gurus are phoney, you can
take that for granted right from the beginning, whether they are
Tibetan Lamas or Catholics, or Hindus) - all of them are phoney
because they are still functioning in a very small part of a field that
has been spat on and trodden upon and destroyed.
What is one to do? You understand my question now? The
problem is this: we don't know the depth and the immensity of the
mind. You can read about it, you can read the modern
psychologists, or the ancient teachers who have talked about it distrust them because it is you yourself who have to find out, not
according to somebody else. We don't know it - the mind - you
don't know it, so you cannot have any concept about it. You
understand what we are saying? You can't have any ideas, any
opinions, any knowledge about it. So you are free from any
supposition, from any theology.
So once again, what is one to do? All that one has to do is to
see. See the corner, the little house that one has built in a corner of
a vast, an immeasurable field; and living there, fighting,
quarrelling, improving (you know all that is going on there), see it.
And that is why it is very important to understand what it means to
see, because the moment there is conflict you belong to that
isolated corner. Where there is seeing there is no conflict. That is
why one has to learn from the very beginning - no, not the
beginning, but now - to see. Not tomorrow, because there is no
tomorrow - it is only search for pleasure, or fear, or pain that
invents "tomorrow". Actually there is no tomorrow
psychologically, but the brain, the mind, has invented time; but we
shall go into this later.

So what one has to do is to see. You cannot see, if you are not
sensitive, and you are not sensitive if you have an image between
you and the thing seen. Do you understand? So seeing is the act of
love. You know what makes the total mind sensitive? - only love.
You can learn a technique and yet love; but if you have technique
and no love you are going to destroy the world. Do watch it in
yourselves, Sirs, do go into it in your own minds and hearts and
you will see it for yourselves. Seeing, observing, listening, these
are the greatest acts, because you cannot see if you are looking out
from that little corner, you cannot see what is happening in the
world, the despair, the anxiety, the aching loneliness, the tears of
the mothers, wives, lovers, of those people who have been killed.
But you have to see all this, not emotionally, nor sentimentally, not
saying, "Well! I am against war" or, "I am for war", as that
sentimentality and emotionalism are the most destructive things they avoid facts and so avoid what is. So, the seeing is all
important. The seeing is the understanding; you cannot understand
through the mind, through the intellect, or understand through a
fragment. There is understanding only when the mind is
completely quiet, which means when there is no image.
Seeing destroys all barriers. Look, Sirs, as long as there is
separation between you and the tree, between you and me, and
between you and your neighbour (that "neighbour" being a
thousand miles away or next door), there must be conflict.
Separation means conflict, that is very simple. And we have lived
in conflict, we are used to conflict and to separation. You see India
as a unit - geographical, political, economical, social, cultural, and
the same goes for Europe, and America, and Russia: separate units,

each against the other, and all this separation is bound to breed
war. This doesn't mean that we must all agree, or if we disagree
that I am doing battle with you; there is no disagreement
whatsoever, or agreement, when you see something as it is. It is
only when you have opinions about what you see, that there is
disagreement and that there is separation. When you and I see that
it is the moon, then there is no disagreement, it is the moon. But if
you think it is something, and I think it is something else, then
there must be division and hence conflict. So in seeing a tree, when
you actually see it, there is no division between you and the tree,
there is no observer seeing the tree.
We were talking one day to a very learned doctor, who had
taken a drug called L.S.D., a minute dosage, and there were two
doctors beside him with a tape recorder registering what he was
saying. After a few seconds he saw the flowers on the table in front
of him, and between those flowers and himself there was no space.
It doesn't mean he identified himself with those flowers, but there
was no space, which means that there was no observer. We are not
advocating that you should take L.S.D., because it has its own
deleterious effects; and also when you take such things you
become a slave to them. But there is a much simpler, more direct,
more natural way, which is to observe for yourself a tree, a flower,
the face of a person; to look at any one of them, and so look that
the space between you and them is non-existent. And you can only
look that way when there is love - that word which has been so
misused.
We will not go into the question of love for the time being, but
when you have this sense of real observation, real seeing, then that

seeing brings with it this extraordinary elimination of time and
space which comes about when there is love. And you cannot have
love without recognising beauty. You may talk about beauty, write,
design, but if you have no love nothing is beautiful. Being without
love means that you are not totally sensitive. And because you are
not totally sensitive you are degenerating. This country is
degenerating. Don't say, "Aren't other countries degenerating too?"
- of course they are, but you are degenerating, though technically
you may be an extraordinarily good engineer, a marvellous lawyer,
technician, know how to run computers; but you are degenerating
because you are not sensitive to the whole process of living.
Our fundamental problem then is - not how to stop wars, not
which god is better than another god, not which political system or
economic system is better, not which party is worth voting for
(they are all crooked anyhow), but the most fundamental problem
for the human being, whether he is in America, India, Russia, or
anywhere else, is this question of freedom from "the little corner".
And that little corner is ourselves, that little corner is your shoddy
little mind. We have made that little corner, because our own little
minds are fragmented and therefore incapable of being sensitive to
the whole; we want that little part to be made safe, peaceful, quiet,
satisfying, pleasurable, thereby avoiding all pain, because,
fundamentally, we are seeking pleasure. And if you have examined
pleasure, your own pleasure, have observed it, watched it, gone
into it, you will see that where there is pleasure, there is pain. You
cannot have one without the other; and we are always demanding
more pleasure and therefore inviting more pain. And on that we
have built this part, which we call human life. Seeing is to be

intimately in contact with it and you cannot be intimately, actually
in contact with it if you have concepts, beliefs, dogmas, or
opinions.
So what is important is not to learn but to see and to listen.
Listen to the birds, listen to your wife's voice, however imtating,
beautiful or ugly, listen to it and listen to your own voice however
beautiful, ugly, or impatient it may be. Then out of this listening
you will find that all separation between the observer and the
observed comes to an end. Therefore no conflict exists and you
observe so carefully that the very observation is discipline; you
don't have to impose discipline. And that is the beauty, Sirs (if you
only realize it), that is the beauty of seeing. If you can see, you
have nothing else to do, because in that seeing there is all
discipline, all virtue, which is attention. And in that seeing there is
all beauty, and with beauty there is love. Then when there is love
you have nothing more to do. Then where you are, you have
heaven; then all seeking comes to an end.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART V
CHAPTER 2 2ND PUBLIC TALK MADRAS 10TH
JANUARY 1968 'FREEDOM'
IT WOULD BE rather interesting and worth while if we could
share together a mind that is not tortured, that is fundamentally
free, that has no barriers, that sees things as they are, that sees that
an interval of time separates man from nature and from other
human beings, that sees the meaning of dreadful, frightening time
and space, that knows what is really the quality of love. If we could
share this - not intellectually, not in a most cunning, elaborate,
philosophical, metaphysical way, but actually partake of it, if we
could do that I think all our problems would end. But this sharing
is not with another, one must have it first. Then when you have it
you have it in abundance. And when there is this abundance the
one and the many are the same, like a tree that is full of leaves of
which one leaf is perfect and is part of the whole tree.
If we could, this evening, share this quality, not with the
speaker, but by having it and then sharing it. Then the question of
sharing it would no longer arise. It is like a flower full of scent
which doesn't share, but is always there for any passer-by to delight
in. And whether anyone is very near in the garden, or very far
away, it is all the same to the flower, because it is full of that
perfume, and so it is sharing with everything. If one could come
upon this, it is really a mysterious flower. It only seems mysterious
because we are so full of emotion and sentiment, and sentiment, in
that emotional sense, has very little meaning; one can have
sympathy, be generous, be very kind, gentle and extremely polite

but the quality of which I have been speaking is entirely different
from all this. And don't you wonder (not in abstract terms, nor
according to something to be gained by a system, by a philosophy
or by following some guru), don't you wonder why it is that human
beings lack this thing? They beget children, they enjoy sex,
tenderness, a quality of sharing something together in
companionship, in friendship, in fellowship, but this thing - why is
it that we haven't got it? For, when it is, then all problems whatever
they may be, come to an end. And haven't you wondered lazily, on
occasion, when you were walking by yourself in a filthy street, or
sitting in a bus, or when you were on a holiday by the seaside, or in
a wood with a lot of birds, trees, streams and wild animals, hasn't it
ever come upon you to ask - why is it that man, who has lived for
millions of years, why is it that he hasn't got this thing, this
extraordinarily unfading flower?
If you have asked this question, even out of casual curiosity,
you must have had an inkling, an intimation, a hint. But, probably,
you have not asked it. We live such a monotonous, dull, sloppy life
within the field of our own problems and anxieties that we have
never even asked this question. And if we were to ask this question
of ourselves (as we are going to do now, sitting under this tree on a
quiet evening, with the noise of the crows), I wonder what would
be our reply. What would each one of us honestly give as a direct
answer, without equivocation or cunning, what would be the
answer if you put this question to yourself? Why do we go through
all this excruciating torture, with so many problems, with
multitudinous fears piling up, yet this one thing seems to go by,
seems to have no place at all. And if you were to ask why, why one

has not found this quality, I wonder what would be your answer?
Your answer would be according to your own intensity in asking
that question, and its urgency. But we are neither intense nor
urgent and we are not urgent or intense because we haven't got the
energy. To look at anything, a bird, a crow sitting on a branch
preening itself, to look at it with all your being, with all your eyes,
ears, nerves, mind and heart, to look at it completely, requires
energy, but not the shoddy energy of a dissipated mind that has
struggled, that has tortured itself, that is full of innumerable
burdens. And most minds, ninety-nine point nine per cent recurring
of minds have this terrible burden, this tortured existence. And so
they have no energy, energy being passion. And you can't find any
truth without passion. That word "passion" is derived from the
Latin word for suffering which again derives from Greek and so
on; from this "suffering" the whole of Christendom worships
sorrow, not passion. And they have given "passion" a special
significance. I don't know what significance you give to it, the
feeling of complete passion, with a fury behind it, with total
energy, that passion in which there is no hidden want.
And if we were to ask, not just with curiosity but with all the
passion we have, then what would be the answer? But probably
you are afraid of passion, because for most people passion is lust,
passion that is derived from sex and all that. Or it may come from
the passion that is felt through identification with the country to
which we belong, or passion for some mean little god, made by the
hand or by the mind; and so to us, passion is rather a frightening
thing because if we have such a passion, we do not know where it
will take us. And so we are very careful to canalise it, to build a

hedge around it through philosophical concepts, ideals, so that
energy, which is demanded in order to solve this extraordinary
question (and it is quite extraordinary if you put it to yourself
honestly, directly), why we human beings, who live in families
with children, surrounded by all the turmoil and violence of the
world, why, when there is one thing that could cover all this, why it
is that we haven't got it? I wonder, is it because we really don't
want to find out? Because to find out anything there must be
freedom, to find out what I think, what I feel, what are my motives,
to find out, not merely to analyse intellectually, but to find out,
there must be freedom to look. To look at that tree you must be
free from worry, from anxiety, from guilt. To look you must be
free from knowledge; freedom is a quality of mind that cannot be
got through renunciation nor sacrifice. Are you following all this,
or am I talking to the winds and the trees? Freedom is a quality of
mind that is essential for seeing. It is not freedom from something.
If you are free from something that is not freedom, it is only a
reaction. If you smoke and you give up smoking, and you say,"I
am free", you are really not free although you may be free from
that particular habit. Freedom concerns the whole habit-forming
machinery, and to understand this whole problem of habit-forming
one must be free to look at its mechanism. Perhaps we are afraid of
that freedom too; and therefore we put freedom far away from us,
in some heaven.
So fear is perhaps the reason why we have not the energy of that
passion to find out for ourselves why that quality of love is lacking
in us. We have everything else, greed, envy, superstition, fear, the
ugliness of a shoddy little life, the routine of going to an office

every day for the next forty, fifty years - not that one shouldn't go
to an office, one has to, unfortunately, but it becomes a routine, and
that routine, that going to the office, doing the same thing day after
day, day after day, for forty years, shapes the mind, makes it dull,
stupid, or clever in only one direction.
It may be, probably it is, that each one of us is so frightened of
life, because without understanding this whole process of living,
we can never possibly understand what it is not to live. You
understand? What we call living, the daily boredom, the daily
struggle, the daily conflict within oneself and outside of oneself,
the hidden demands, the hidden wants, the ambitions, the cruelties,
and the enormous burden of conscious or unconscious sorrow - that
is what we call living - don't we? We may try to escape from it, go
to the temple, or the club, follow a new guru, or become a hippy or
take to drink, or join some society which promises us something anything to escape. In fear lies the major problem of what we call
living (fear of not being, fear of being attached, with all the great
pain it brings - how to be detached - whether there is physical,
emotional, psychological, security - the fear of that - the fear of the
unknown, fear of tomorrow, the fear of your wife leaving you, the
fear of having no belief and being isolated, lonely, in despair at
every moment, deep down), this is what we call living, a battle, a
tortured existence with barren thoughts. We live like this because
that is our life, with occasional moments of sanity, occasional
moments of clarity to which we cling furiously.
Please, Sirs, don't merely listen to words and don't be carried
away by them; explanations, definitions, descriptions, are not the
fact. The fact is your life, the fact is whether you are aware of it,

and you cannot be aware of it through the speaker's words, which
merely describe your condition and if you are caught up in the
description, in the words, then you are certainly lost forever. And
that is what we are - we are lost, we are forlorn because we have
accepted words, words, words. So don't please, I beg of you, be
caught in words, but watch yourself, watch your life, your daily life
which you call living, which consists of going to the office, passing
examinations, getting a job, not having a job, fear, family and
social pressure, tradition, the torture of not arriving, the uncertainty
of life, the utter deep boredom of life that has no meaning
whatsoever. You may give significance to life, you can invent as
philosophers and theoreticians do, as religious people do - invent
the significance of life, that is their job. But this is feeding on
words when you need substance; you are fed with words, and you
are satisfied with words. So to understand this living we have to
look at it: to come intimately into contact with it, not have the
space and time interval between yourself and it. You don't have
this time-space interval when you have deep physical pain, you act,
you don't theorize, you don't quarrel about whether there is Atman
or no Atman, soul or no soul, you don't begin to quote the Gita, the
Upanishads, the Koran, or the Bible or some saint. Then you are
face to face with actual life. Life is that movement which is active,
the doing, the thinking, the feeling, the fears, the guilt, the despair that is life. And one has to be intimately in contact with it. And one
cannot be intensely, passionately, vitally, in contact, if there is fear.
Fear is what makes us believe, whether our belief is in the
ideological community of the Communist, or the theocratical idea
of a clergyman or a priest. All these things are born out of fear;

obviously all gods, all, are the outcome of our agony; and when we
worship them we are worshipping our agony, our loneliness,
despair, misery and sorrow. Do please listen to all this - it is your
life, not my life. You have to face this and so you have to
understand fear. And you cannot understand fear if you don't
understand life. You have to understand the jealousy that you have,
the envy - envy and jealousy which are merely the indications of
fear. And you can understand totally (not intellectually, there is no
such thing as understanding intellectually, there is only
understanding totally), you can understand totally and it is like
looking at that sunset with your mind, with your heart, with your
eyes, with your nerves; it is then you understand. And to
understand jealousy, envy, ambition, cruelty, violence (to
understand them and give your complete attention at the moment
anything happens, at the moment you feel envious, angry, jealous
or full of hate, or feel dishonest in yourself), then, if you
understand that, you will understand fear. But you can't take fear as
an abstraction. After all fear exists in relation to something. Are
you not afraid of your neighbour, of the government, of your wife,
or your husband, afraid of death, and so on? You have to observe,
not fear, but enquire as to what has brought this about.
Now we are going to examine what living is, to which we cling
so desperately, the living of our daily, monotonous, tragic life - the
life of the bourgeois, the mediocre, the down-trodden - because we
are all downtrodden by society, by culture, by religions, by priests,
by leaders, by saints, and unless you understand this you will never
understand fear; so we are going to understand this living and also
that enormous source of fear, which is called death. And to

understand it you have to have tremendous energy, passion. You
know how we waste our energy (I don't mean through sex, that is a
very small affair, don't make that into something unnecessarily
tremendous), but one must enquire directly, not according to
Shankara or any of those people, who have invented their own
particular form of escape from life.
To find out what living is, we must not only have energy but
also the quality of passion that is sustained, and intellect cannot
possibly sustain passion. And to have that passion one has to
enquire into the wastage of energy. One can see that it is a waste of
energy to follow anybody - you understand? - to have a leader, to
have a guru, because when you follow you are imitating, you are
copying, you are obeying, you are establishing authority and your
energy is therefore diffused. Do observe this; please do so. Don't
go back to your gurus, to your societies, to your authorities, drop
them like hot potatoes. You can also see how you waste your
energy when there is compromise. You know what compromise is?
There is compromise only when there is comparison. And we, from
childhood, are trained to compare between what we are and what
the head of the class in our school is; compare ourselves with what
we were yesterday, noble or ignoble, with the happiness that we
felt yesterday, that came upon us without warning, suddenly it
came, the delight of looking at a tree, at flowers, at the face of a
lovely woman, a child or a man, and then we compare what is
today with what was yesterday. This comparison, this
measurement, is the beginning of compromise. Do please look at
this for yourself. Find out the truth of it, that the moment you have
a measure, which is comparison, you are already compromising

with what is. When you say that man is an I.C.S., he earns so
much, he is the head of this or that, you are comparing, judging,
placing people as important, not as human beings, but according to
their degrees, their qualities, their earning capacity, their job, their
Ph.D.s and the whole lot of alphabets after their names; and so you
are comparing, comparing yourself with another, whether "the
other" is a saint, a hero, a god, an idea, or an ideology - comparing,
measuring - and all this breeds compromise which is a tremendous
wastage of energy. This is not a question of when you are sexual
and the tradition behind that. So, one sees how this is a waste of
energy and the energy is wasted when you indulge in ideation, in
theories: whether there is a soul or no soul, whether there is an
Atman, or no Atman - isn't it a waste of time, a waste of energy?
When you read or listen to some saint endlessly, or some sannyasi,
making commentaries on the Gita, or the Upanishadsjust think of
it! - the absurdity of it! - the childishness of it! Somebody explains
some book which in itself is dead, written by some dead poet,
giving to it a tremendous significance. All this shows that
immaturity is essentially a waste of energy.
The immature mind compares itself with what is and what
should be, but it is only the immature mind that compares. The
mature mind has no comparison, the mature mind has no measure.
I don't know if you have ever looked into yourself and watched
how you compare yourself with another, saying, "He is so
beautiful, so intelligent, so clever, so prominent; and I am nobody,
I would like to be like him." Or, "She is so beautiful, has a good
figure, has a nice mind, intelligent, bright, better." We think and
function in this comparative, measuring world. And if you have

ever questioned and observed maybe you have said, "No more
comparison, no more comparison with anybody, not with the most
beautiful actress." You know that beauty is not in the actress,
beauty is something total, not in the face, in the figure, in the smile,
but where there is a quality of total comprehension, the totality of
one's being; when that is what looks, there is beauty. Do watch it in
yourself, please, try it, or rather do it - when you use the word
"try", you know how such a mind is the most deplorable, foolish
mind; when it says, "I am doing my best, I am trying", this
indicates a mind that is essentially bourgeois, capable of
measuring, which is doing better every day; so, find out for
yourself whether you can live, not theoretically but actually,
without comparison, measure, never using the words "better" or
"more". See what happens. It is only such a mature mind that is not
wasting energy, only such a mind can live a very simple life, I
mean a life of real simplicity, not the so-called simplicity of the
man who has one meal, or one loincloth - that's exhibitionism - but
the mind that has no measure and is therefore not wasting energy.
So to come to the point. We are wasting energy and you need
this energy to understand this monstrous way of living. And we
must understand it, that is the only thing we have, not gods, Bibles,
Gitas, or ideals; what you have is this thing - the daily torture, the
daily anxiety. And to understand it, be in contact with it, is to have
no space between yourself as the observer and the thing as despair,
and for this you must have tremendous, driving energy. To have
that energy, it cannot be dissipated - when this occurs you will
understand what living is. Then there is no fear of life, of the
movement of life. You know what a movement is? A movement

has no end and no beginning, and therefore the movement in itself
is the beauty, the glory. Are you following this?
So life is this movement and to understand it there must be
freedom, there must be energy. And to understand death is to
understand something which is closely related to life. You know,
beauty (not in pictures, not in a person, not in the tree or in the
cloud or in the sunset) beauty cannot be divorced from love. And
where there is love and beauty there is life and also there is death.
You cannot separate one from the other. The moment you separate
there is conflict, there is no relationship. So we have looked, not in
great detail or widely, perhaps, but we have looked at life.
Now let us consider, go into, this question of death. Have you
asked why you are frightened of death? Apparently most people
are. Some don't want even to know about it, or if they do, they
want to glorify it. Or some invent a theory, a belief, an escape - an
escape such as resurrection, or reincarnation. The majority of the
people who live in the East believe in reincarnation - you all do,
probably. That is, a permanent entity, or a collective memory, is
reborn again in the next life - isn't it? That is what you all believe;
to have a better opportunity, to live more fully, to perfect yourself,
because this life is so short, this life can't give you all the
experience, all the joy, all the knowledge, therefore - let's have a
next life! You want a next life where you will have time and space
to perfect yourself, so you have that belief. This is escape from the
fact - we are not concerned with whether there is or there is not
reincarnation, or whether there is continuity or no continuity. That
requires quite a different analysis. We can see briefly how that
which has continuity is that which has been, that which has been

yesterday will continue today, through today to tomorrow. And
such a continuity is within time and space. This is not intellectual,
you can observe it very simply for yourself. And we are frightened
of this thing called death. We are not only frightened of living but
we are also frightened of this unknown thing. Are we frightened of
the unknown, or frightened of the known, of losing the known?
That is, the family, your experiences, your daily monotonous
existence - the known - the house, the garden, the smile to which
you are accustomed, the food which you have eaten for thirty
years, the same food, the same climate, the same books, the same
tradition - you are frightened of losing that, aren't you? How can
you be frightened of something you don't know?
So thought is frightened not only of losing the known but also
thought is frightened of something which it calls death, unknown.
As we said, fear cannot be got rid of, but it can be understood only
when the things that produce the fear, like death, are understood.
Now man throughout time has pushed death far away; the ancient
Egyptians for instance lived to die. Death is something in the
distance, that time-space interval between life and that which we
call death. Thought, which has divided this, divided the living from
the dying, thought keeps it apart. Do go into it, Sirs, it is very
simple if you do so. Thought keeps it separate because thought has
said, "I don't know what the future is; I can have a lot of theories if
I believe in reincarnation, it means I must behave, work, act, now if I believe that. What you do now matters when you die - but you
don't believe that way. You believe in reincarnation as an idea, a
comforting idea, but rather vague, so you don't care what you do
now. You really don't believe in karma although you talk a great

deal about it. If you really, actually, vitally, believed in it, as you
believe in earning money, in sexual experience, then every word,
every gesture, every movement of your being would matter,
because you are going to pay for it in the next life. So that belief
would bring tremendous discipline - but you don't believe, it is an
escape, you are frightened because you don't want to let go.
And what are you letting go? Look at it. When you say, "I am
afraid to let go" - what are you afraid of? Letting go what? Do look
at it very closely. Your family, your mother, your wife, your child?
Were you ever in relation with them? Or were you related to an
idea, to an image? And when you say, "I am afraid to let go, to be
detached" - what are you thinking of being detached from?
Memories? Surely memories, memories of sexual pleasure,
memories of your becoming a big man, or a little man climbing up
the ladder, memories of your character, memories of your
friendship - just memories. And you are afraid to let those
memories go. However pleasant or unpleasant they may be, what
are memories? They have no substance whatsoever. So you are
frightened of letting go something which has no value at all,
memory being that which has continuity, the bundle of memories, a
unit, a centre.
So when one understands living, that is, when one understands
jealousy, anxiety, guilt and despair and when one is beyond and
above them, then life and death are very close together. Then living
is dying. You know if you live according to memories, traditions,
and what you "should be", you are not living. But if you put away
all that, which means dying to all that you know - freedom from
the known - this is death, and then you are living. You are living,

not in some fantastic world of concepts but actually living, not
according to the Vedas, the Upanishads which have no validity;
what has validity is the life that you lead every day, that is the only
life you have, and without understanding it, you will never
understand either love, beauty, or death.
We come back to that original thing, which is: why there is not
this flame in our heart. Because if you have examined very closely
what has been said (not verbally, intellectually, but examined it in
your own mind, in your own heart), then you will know why you
haven't got it. If you know why you haven't got it, if you feel it and
live with it, if you are passionate in your search for why you
haven't got it, then you will find that you have it. Through
complete negation, that thing which alone is the positive, which is
love, comes into being. Like humility, you cannot cultivate love.
Humility comes into being when there is total ending of conceit,
vanity, but then you will never know what it is to be humble. For a
man who knows what it is to have humility is a vain man. In the
same way when you give your mind and your heart, your nerves,
your eyes, your whole being to find out the way of life, to see what
actually "is" and go beyond it, and deny completely, totally, the life
that is lived now, in that very denial of the ugly, brutal, in its
complete denial, the other comes into being. But you will never
know it either. A man who knows that he is silent, or knows that he
loves, doesn't know what love is, nor what silence is.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART V
CHAPTER 3 3RD PUBLIC TALK MADRAS 14TH
JANUARY 1968 'THE SACRED'
ONE CAN GO on endlessly reading, discussing, piling up words
upon words, without ever doing anything about it. It is like a man
that is always ploughing, never sowing, and therefore never
reaping. Most of us are in that position. And words, ideas, theories,
have become much more important than actual living, which is
acting, doing. I do not know if you have ever wondered why,
throughout the world, ideas, formulas, concepts, have tremendous
significance, not only scientifically but also theologically. I wonder
why? Is it an escape from actuality, from daily, monotonous life?
Or, is it that we think ideas and theories will help us to live more will give us greater vision, greater depth to life? Because we say
that without ideas, without having a significance, an objective in
life, life is very shallow, empty and has no meaning at all. That
may be one of the reasons. Or, is it because we find living, the
daily grind, the routine, the boredom, lacking in a quality of
sensitivity that we hope to derive from ideation?
Life as we live it is obviously very brutal, and makes us
insensitive, dull, heavy, stupid, and so we may hope through ideas,
through ideational mentation, to bring about a certain quality of
sensitivity. Because we notice that our life inevitably is a repetitive
affair (sex, office, eating, the endless chatter about things that
really don't matter, the constant friction in relationship), all this
does make for crudeness, for brutality, for hardness. And being
aware of that (perhaps not consciously but deep down), one may

think that ideas, ideals, theories about God, the hereafter, may give
a quality of refinement, may perhaps bring to this dull, aching life,
a meaning, a significance, a purpose; perhaps we think it may
polish our minds, give them sharpness, give them a quality that the
ordinary daily worker in the field or in the factory does not have.
So perhaps that is one of the reasons why we indulge in this
peculiar game. But even when we are sharpened and quickened
intellectually by argument, by discussion, by reading, this does not
actually bring about that quality of sensitivity. And you know all
those people who are erudite, who read, who theorize, who can
discuss brilliantly, are extraordinarily dull people.
So I think sensitivity, which destroys mediocrity, is very
important to understand. Because most of us are becoming, I am
afraid, more and more mediocre. We are not using that word in any
derogative sense at all, but merely observing the fact of mediocrity
in the sense of being average, fairly well educated, earning a
livelihood and perhaps capable of clever discussion; but this leaves
us still bourgeois, mediocre, not only in our attitudes but in our
activities. And maturity does not bring about a mutation, a change,
a revolution in mediocrity (this can be observed very clearly),
although one may have an old body, mediocrity in different forms
continues.
Perhaps we could go into this question of sensitivity (not mere
physical refinement, which is obviously necessary), but into the
question of sensitivity, the highest form of sensitivity which is the
highest intelligence; without being sensitive you are not intelligent.
To listen to that crow, to be aware of it, to feel its movement, to
have no space between that and yourself (which doesn't mean

identity with the crow, as this would be too absurd), but that
quality of a mind that is highly sharpened, attentive, in which the
observer, which is the centre, the censor, with his accumulated
memories and tradition, is not. It is after all a question of constant
habit, the way we think, the food that we eat, the way we choose
our friends, who obviously are our friends because they don't
contradict, they don't disturb us too much. So life becomes not only
repetitive but also habitual, routine. So sensitivity needs attention.
You know concentration is a most deadly thing. You accept it,
do you? I am saying, the speaker is saying something totally
contradictory to what you all feel is necessary. So don't accept it,
nor deny it, but look at it. Feel your way into what is true and what
is false. What the speaker is saying may be utterly stupid and
nonsensical, or it may be true. But to accept or to deny makes you
remain as you are, dull, heavy, habit-ridden, insensitive. But in
what we are going to say in a moment and even now, do not accept
or compare with what you already know or what you have been
told or read, but listen in order to find out for yourself what is true.
And to give attention, to listen, you have to give your total
attention. You cannot give your total attention if you are merely
learning to concentrate, or if you are trying to concentrate on a few
words, or on the meaning of words, or what you have already
heard. But give your attention, and this means listening without
any barrier, without any interference or comparison, or
condemnation; that is giving total attention; then you will find out
for yourself what is true or false without being told. But this is one
of the most difficult things to do - to give attention. Attention does
not demand any quality of will or desire. We function within the

pattern of desire, which is will. That is, we say, "I will pay
attention, I will try to listen without the barriers, without all the
screens between the speaker and myself." But the exercise of will
is not attention.
Will is the most destructive thing that man has cultivated. Do
you again accept that? To accept, or to deny, is not to find the truth
of it; but to find the truth of it you have to give attention to it, to
what the speaker is saying. Will is, after all, the culmination of
desire - I want something, I desire something, I want it and I
pursue it. The desire may be a very thin thread, but it is
strengthened by constant repetition, and this becomes the will - "I
will" and "I will not". And on that assertive level (which can also
be negative), we function, we operate and we approach life. "I will
succeed, I will become, I will be noble" - all very strong desires.
And we are now saying that to be attentive has nothing whatsoever
to do with desire or will.
Then, how is one to be attentive? Please follow this. Knowing
one is not attentive (knowing one has a certain amount of
concentration, which is an exercise of will which excludes and
resists, knowing that any form of effort, which again is will, is not
attention), how is one to attend? Because if you can give total
attention to everything that you do (and you therefore do very
little), what you do, you do completely with your heart, with your
mind, with your nerves, with everything you have. And how is this
attention to come about, naturally, without any effort, with no
exercise of the will, without using attention as a means to
something else? I hope you are following all this. You know, you
are going to find it awfully difficult if you don't follow this step by

step, as you are probably not used to it; you are used to being told
what to do, which you do repetitively, and you think you have
understood it. But what we are trying to say is something entirely
different.
This attention then comes about naturally, easily, when you
know you are inattentive - right? When you are aware that you are
inattentive, not giving attention, being aware of that fact is being
attentive, and you have nothing else to do. Do you understand?
Through negation you come to the positive, but not through the
pursuit of the positive. When you do things without this action you
do things in a state of inattention, and to be aware of action in a
state of inattention, is attention. This makes the mind very subtle,
makes the mind tremendously alert, because then there is no
wastage of energy. Whereas the exercise of will is wastage of
energy, just as concentration is.
We said that this attention is necessary - don't say, "Define what
you mean by attention", you might just as well look it up in a
dictionary. We are not going to define it, what we are trying to do
is, by denying what is not, to come upon it by yourself. We are
saying, this attention is necessary for sensitivity, which is
intelligence at the deeper level. Again, these words are difficult
because there is no measurement - when you say, "deeper",
"more", you are comparing, and comparison is a waste of energy.
So, if that is understood, we can use words to convey a meaning
which is not comparative but actual.
This sensitivity implies intelligence and we need great
intelligence to live, to live our daily life, because it is only
intelligence that can possibly bring about a total revolution in our

psyche, in the very core of our being. And such a mutation is
necessary, because man has lived for millions of years in agony, in
despair, always battling with himself and with the world. He has
invented a peace which is not peace at all; such peace is between
two wars, between two conflicts. And as society is getting more
and more complex, disorderly, competitive, there must be radical
change, not in society, but in the human being who has created
society. The human being, as he is, is a very disorderly person, he
is very confused; he believes, he doesn't believe, he has theories
and so on and so on; he lives in a state of contradiction. And he has
built a society, a culture which is contradictory, with its rich and its
poor. There is disorder, not only in our life, but also outwardly in
society. And order is completely necessary. You know what is
happening in the world - here in India - look at it! What is
happening? Colleges are closed, a whole generation of young
people is without education; they will be destroyed by politicians
quarrelling over some silly division of language. Then there is the
Vietnamese war in which human beings are being destroyed for an
idea. There are the racial riots in America, terribly destructive
things. And in China there is civil war; in Russia, tyranny,
suppression of freedom, at best slow liberalisation - there is
division between nationalities, separation due to religions, all of
which indicate complete disorder. And this disorder is brought
about by each one of us; we are responsible. Do please see the
responsibility of it. The older generation has made a mess of the
world, you have made a terrible mess of the world with your pujas,
your gurus, with your gods, with your nationalities, because you
are only concerned with earning a livelihood and cultivating part of

the brain, the rest you neglect, you discard. Each human being is
responsible for this disorder within himself and in the society in
which he lives; Communism and other forms of tyranny are not
going to bring order, on the contrary they are going to bring about
more disorder, because man needs to be free.
So there is disorder. And order is necessary, otherwise there can
be no peace at all. And it is only in peace, in quietness, in beauty,
that goodness can flower. Order is virtue, not the cultivated virtue
of a cunning mind. Order is virtue, and order is a living thing,just
as virtue is a living thing. So virtue cannot be practised as things
are. We are going to go into this, listen to it. You cannot practise it
any more than you can practise humility, or have a method to find
out what love is.
So order in this sense has the same pattern as mathematics; in
the highest mathematics is the highest order, absolute order. And
that absolute order, one must have it in oneself. And as virtue
cannot be cultivated, put together, so order cannot be engendered,
put together by the mind; but what the mind can do is to find out
what disorder is. You are following this? You know what is
disorder - living in the way we live is total disorder. As things are,
each man is out for himself, there is no co-operation, there is no
love, there is complete callousness as to what happens in Vietnam
or in China, or at your next door neighbour's. Be aware of this
disorder, and out of the understanding of this disorder understand
how it has come about, the cause of it, so that when you understand
the causes, the forces that are at work bringing about this disorder,
understand it truly, not merely intellectually; then out of that
understanding will come order. Now let us try to understand

disorder, which is our daily life, understand it, not intellectually or
verbally, but observe it, how one has been separated from others by
being a Hindu, a Muslim, a Christian (the Christian with his god,
with his ideals and the Hindu with his ideals, the Muslim with his
own ideals peculiar to him, and so on), observe it, come closely
into contact with it, do not have prejudices, otherwise you cannot
come directly into contact with another human being.
So, out of disorder comes order, and it comes about naturally,
freely, easily, with great beauty and vitality, when you are directly
in contact with disorder in yourself. You are not in contact with
this disorder directly, with yourself, if you do not know how to
look at yourself. How to see yourself (we have gone into this
question of seeing), how to look at a tree, a flower - because as we
said the other day, the act of seeing is the act of love? The act of
seeing is action. We will go into this a little bit because this is
really very important.
When you give your attention completely, that is, with your
mind, with your eyes, with your heart, with your nerves - when you
give complete attention, you will find there is no centre at all, there
is no observer and therefore there is no division between the
observed and the observer, and you eradicate conflict totally, this
conflict brought about by separation, by division. It only seems
difficult because you are not used to this way of looking at life. It
is really quite simple. It is really very simple if you know how to
look at a tree, if you know how to see anew the tree, your wife,
your husband, your neighbour, if you look anew at the sky with its
stars, with its silent depth - look, see and listen, then you have
solved the whole problem of understanding, because then there is

no "understanding" at all, then there is only a state of mind that has
no division, and therefore no conflict.
To come upon this naturally, easily, fully, there must be
attention. This attention can only come about easily when you
know how to look, how to listen - how to look at a tree, or your
wife, or your neighbour, or at the stars, or even at your boss,
without any image. The image is, after all, the past - the past,
which has been accumulated through experience, pleasant or
unpleasant; and with that image you look at your wife, your
children, your neighbour, the world; you look with that image at
nature. So what is in contact is your memory, the image which has
been put together by memory. And that image looks and therefore
there is no direct contact. You know when you have pain there is
no image, there is only pain, and therefore there is immediate
action. You may postpone going to the doctor, but action is
involved. In the same way when you look and listen, you know the
beauty of immediate action in which there is no conflict
whatsoever. That is why it is important to know the art of looking,
which is very simple - to look with complete attention, with your
heart and with your mind. And attention means love, because you
cannot look at that sky and be extraordinarily sensitive if there is a
division between yourself and the beauty of that sunset.
This order can only come about when we see, that is actually
come into contact with disorder, which is in ourselves, which is us.
We are not in disorder - "we" is a state of disorder. Now when you
look at yourself without any image about yourself, actually at what
you are (not what Shankara, Buddha, Freud, Jung, or X Y Z says,
because then you are looking at yourself according to their image),

you look at the disorder in yourself, the anger, the brutality, the
violence, the stupidity, the indifference, the callousness, the
constant drive of ambition with its peculiar cruelty - if you can be
aware of that without any image, without any word, and look at it,
then you are directly in contact with it. And when there is direct
contact there is immediate action. There is immediate action when
you have intense pain, and when there is great danger there is
instant action. And this instant action is life, not the thing that we
have hitherto called life, which is a battlefield, an agony in that
battlefield, despair, hidden wants and so on; that is what we have
called life. Please do observe this in yourself. Use the speaker as a
mirror in which you see yourself now. What the speaker is saying
is merely exposing yourself to yourself. And therefore look at this,
listen to it and become completely in contact with it, be totally with
it, and, if you are, you will see that there is immediate action.
The past is then destroyed. You know the past is the
unconscious. You know what the unconscious is? Don't go back to
Freud, Jung or all the rest of those people, but look at it for
yourself and find out, not through empiricism, but actually observe
it. The past in you is your tradition, the books that you have read,
the racial inheritance as the Hindu, Buddhist, Muslim, Christian,
and all the rest of it, and the culture in which you have lived, the
temples, the beliefs that have been handed down from generation
to generation. This constitutes the propaganda to which you have
been subjected, your propaganda; you are slaves to the propaganda
of five thousand years. And the Christian is a slave to propaganda
of two thousand years. He believes in Jesus Christ and you believe
in Krishna, or whatever you do believe in, as the Communist

believes in something else. We are the result of propaganda. Do
you realize what it means? - words, the influence of others; so
there is nothing whatsoever original. And to find out the origin of
anything we must have order. Order that can only come about
when there is the cessation of total disorder in oneself. Because all
of us, at least those who are a little serious and thoughtful and
earnest, must have asked whether there is anything sacred at all,
anything holy. Of course the answer is that the temple, the mosque,
or the church is not holy, is not sacred, nor the images therein.
I do not know if you have experimented with yourself. Take a
piece of stick, put it on the mantelpiece and every day put a flower
in front of it - give it a flower - put in front of it a flower and repeat
some words - "Coca-cola", "Amen", "Om", it doesn't matter what
word - any word you like - listen, don't laugh it off - do it and you
will find out. If you do it, after a month you will see how holy it
has become. You have identified yourself with that stick, with that
piece of stone or with that piece of idea and you have made it into
something sacred, holy. But it is not. You have given it a sense of
holiness out of your fear, out of the constant habit of this tradition,
giving yourself over, surrendering yourself to something, which
you consider holy. The image in the temple is no more holy than a
piece of rock by the roadside. So it is very important to find out
what is really sacred, what is really holy, if there is such a thing at
all.
You know, man has spoken of this throughout the centuries,
seeking something that is imperishable, that is not created by the
mind, that is holy in itself, something that is never touched by the
past. Man is always seeking that. And man, seeking that, not

finding it, has invented religion, organized belief. A serious man
has to find out, not through some rock, temple or idea, but he has
to find what is really, truly, everlastingly sacred. If you cannot find
it, you will always be cruel, you will always be in conflict. And if
you will, this evening, listen, perhaps you may come upon it, not
through the speaker, not through his words, not through his
statements, but you may come upon it when there is discipline
through the understanding of disorder. When you watch, see what
is disorder; the very seeing of disorder demands attention. Please
do follow this. You know, for most of us, discipline is a drill, as it
is for the soldier, drill, drill from morning until night so that there
is nothing but slavery to a habit. And that is what we call
discipline; suppression, control - that is deadly, that is not
discipline at all. Discipline is a living thing, it has its own beauty,
its own freedom. And this discipline comes naturally, when you
know how to look at a tree, how to look at the face of your wife,
your husband, when you can see the beauty of a tree or a sunset. To
see, to look at that sky, the glow of it, the beauty of the leaves
against that glow, the orange colour, the depth of that colour, the
swiftness of that colour-see it! To see it you must give your whole
attention to it. And to give your whole attention has its own
discipline, you don't want any other discipline. So that thing that
attention is a living thing, moving and vital.
This attention itself is virtue. You need no other ethical
standard, no morality (anyhow you have no morality, except on the
one hand the morality that the society which you have built tells
you, and on the other hand what you want to do, and neither has
anything whatsoever to do with virtue). Virtue is beauty and beauty

is love, and without love you have no virtue and therefore no order.
So again, if you have done it now, as the speaker is talking about it,
looking at that sky with your whole being, that very act of looking
has its own discipline and therefore its own virtue, its own order.
Then the mind reaches the highest point of absolute order and
therefore because it is absolutely orderly, it itself becomes the
sacred. I do not know if you understand this. You know, when you
love the tree, the bird, the light on the water, when you love your
neighbour, your wife, your husband, without jealousy, that love
that has never been touched by hate, when there is that love, that
love itself is sacred, you have no other thing that can be more so.
So there is that sacred thing, not in the things that man has put
together, but which comes into being when man cuts himself off
entirely from the past, which is memory. This does not mean that
man becomes absent-minded, he must have memory in a certain
direction, but that memory will be found to be part of this whole
state in which there is no relation with the past. And that cessation
of the past can only be when you see things as they are and come
directly in contact with them - as with that marvellous sunset. Then
out of this order, discipline, virtue, there comes into being love.
Love is tremendously passionate and therefore it acts immediately.
It has no time interval between the seeing and the doing. And when
you have that love you can put away all your sacred books, all your
gods. And you have to put away your sacred books, your gods,
your everyday ambitions, to come upon that love. That is the only
sacred thing there is. And to come upon it, goodness must flower.
Goodness - you understand, Sirs? - goodness can only flower in
freedom, not in tradition. The world needs change, you need

tremendous revolution in yourself; the world needs this tremendous
revolution (not economic, Communist, bloody revolution that man
has tried throughout history, that has only led him to more misery).
But we do need fundamental, psychological, revolution, and this
revolution is order. And order is peace; and this order, with its
virtue and peace, can only come about when you come directly into
contact with disorder in your daily life. Then out of that blossoms
goodness and then there will be no seeking any more. For that
which is, is sacred.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VI CHAPTER 1 1ST PUBLIC DIALOGUE
MADRAS 2ND JANUARY 1968 'CONFLICT'
Krishnamurti: I think that these should not really be called
"Discussions", but rather conversations between two people or
between many of us - conversations about serious matters in which
most of us are not merely interested but seriously concerned with
deep intention to understand the problems involved. And so the
conversations become not only objective but also very intimate. It
is like two people talking things over together amicably, easily exposing themselves to each other. Otherwise I do not see the point
of such conversations. What we are trying to do, aren't we, is to
understand (not intellectually or verbally or theoretically but
actually) what are the imperative necessities in life, and in what
way one can resolve the deep fundamental problems that every
human being is concerned with. So is that very clear - that we are
conversing together as two friends making themselves known to
each other, not merely dialectically giving their opinions, but
actually investigating, thinking over their problems together? Now
if that is clear, what shall we talk about together?
Questioner: The other day you were talking about the observer
and the observed, and resolving the conflict between...
Krishnamurti: Is that what you want to discuss? Please Sir, let
us all find out what each one of us wants to discuss and then put it
all together and see what happens.
Questioner: Why do you say that studying Indian culture and art
and Indian philosophies is violence?

Questioner: What are the steps to take to uncondition ourselves?
Questioner: The mind produces images, but what is seen by the
mind is not true.
Krishnamurti: Is that what we are all concerned about in our
daily life? Sirs, are we reducing, this morning, this gathering to a
mere intellectual, verbal exchange of ideas?
Questioner: What is meant by clear thinking?
Questioner: What is the "actual"...
Questioner: Do you suggest that violence and non-violence are
two extremes?
Questioner: Can we not guide our lives by certain principles?
Krishnamurti: Haven't we got enough questions? What do you
think, Sirs, is the most important question of all these?
Questioner: What is it to pay attention?
Krishnamurti: Sirs, what do you think is the most important
thing to discuss? Can we take this question of observation and
thinking? Shall we? That is - what is it to observe, to listen, and
who is it that listens, who is it that thinks? We shall relate it to
daily living and not to some abstract concepts, because this country
- like every other country in the world - functions at the conceptual
level, except technologically. What do we mean by seeing? What
do you think?
Questioner: Observing a little more attentively.
Krishnamurti: Why do you say "a little more"? Sir, when we use
the words "I see a tree", "I see you", "I see or understand what you
are saying" - what do we mean by the word "seeing"? Let us go
slowly if you do not mind - step by step. When you see a tree, what
do you mean by that?

Questioner: We only look superficially.
Krishnamurti: What do you mean by "superficially" looking at
it? When you see a tree, what do you mean by "seeing"? Do please
stick to that one word. Questioner: Catching a glimpse of it.
Krishnamurti: First of all, Sirs, have you looked at a tree? If you
have looked, what do you see through your "seeing" eyes, the
image of the tree or the tree?
Questioner: The image of the tree.
Krishnamurti: Do be careful, please, Sirs. Do you see the image
in the sense of the mental construction or the concept of that tree,
or do you actually see the tree?
Questioner: The physical existence of the tree.
Krishnamurti: Do you actually see that? Sirs, there is a tree...
You must be able to see a tree or a leaf out of that window as I see
it. When you see it what do you actually see? Do you see only the
image of that tree or do you actually see the tree itself, without the
image?
Questioner: We see the tree itself.
Questioner: We come to understand it.
Krishnamurti: Before we come to understand it, when I say "I
see a tree" do I actually see the tree or the image I have about that
tree? When you look at your wife or your husband, do you see her
or him or the image you have about him or her? (Pause) When you
look at your wife you see her through your memories, through your
experience of her and her ways, and through those images you see
her. And do we do the same with regard to the tree?
Questioner: When I look at a tree I just see a tree.
Krishnamurti: Ah, you are not a botanist, you are a lawyer and

therefore you look at that tree actually as a tree, but if you were a
botanist, if you were really interested in the tree, how it grows,
what it is like, the aliveness, the quality of it, then you would have
images, you would have pictures, you would compare it with other
trees, and so on. You are looking at it aren't you, with a
comparative look, with botanical knowledge, seeing whether you
like it or not, whether it gives shade or not,`whether it is beautiful
or not, and so on and so on. So, when you have all those images,
associations, memories with regard to that tree, are you then
actually looking at that tree? Are you directly looking at that tree or
have you a screen between that tree and the visual perception of it?
Questioner: I tell myself what kind of a tree it is.
Krishnamurti: As a symbol. So you do not actually look at that
tree. But this is simple, isn't it?
Questioner: A tree is a tree.
Krishnamurti: The "tree", Sirs, I see is rather difficult. Let us
look at it differently. Do you look at your wife or your husband
through the image you have built about her or him? Or your friend?
You have created an impression, and the impression has left an
image, an idea, a memory, isn't that so?
Questioner: My impressions of my wife have accumulated...
Krishnamurti: Yes, they have solidified, thickened, grown solid.
So when you look at your wife or husband you are looking at him
or her through the image you have built. Right. This is simple, isn't
it? This is what we are all doing. Now, are we really looking at her
or at the symbol, the memories? - is this the screen through which
we look?
Questioner: How can we prevent that?

Krishnamurti: It is not a question of preventing. Let us see first
what is actually taking place.
Questioner: When you look for the first time at a woman or a
man you have no previous impression.
Krishnamurti: Naturally not.
Questioner: Are we not then looking at the woman or the man?
Krishnamurti: Of course you are. Why do you make it into such
an abstraction? What actually takes place in daily life? You are
married, or you live with a person, there is sex, pleasure, pain,
insults, annoyance, boredom, indifference, nagging, bullying,
domination, obeying and all the rest of it - all that has created an
image in you about the other person and through that image you
look at each other. Right? So are we looking at the woman or at the
man, or are the images looking at each other?
Questioner: The image is the person.
Krishnamurti: No, no. There is a vast difference between them.
Is there not a difference?
Questioner: We don't know any other way.
Krishnamurti: That is the only method of seeing you know.
Questioner: We alter our impression...
Krishnamurti: It is all part of that image, Sir - adding and
subtracting. Look, Sir. Have you an image of the speaker? You
have an image of the speaker and the image is based on his
reputation, on what he has said previously, on what he condemns
or what he approves, and so on. You have built an image. And
through that image you listen or look. Right? That image either
increases or decreases according to your pleasure or pain. And that
image is obviously interpreting what the speaker is saying.

Questioner: We feel a strong impulse to come to your talks...
Krishnamurti: No, no, Sir. You may like my "blue eyes" or
something! All that is included, Sir. The stimulation, the
inspiration, the drive - you can add lots of things to that image!
Questioner: We don't know of any other way of looking.
Krishnamurti: We are going to find out, Sir. We not only look at
people or trees in that way, but also we look at concepts, don't we at the Communist ideology, the Socialist ideology, and so on. We
look at everything through concepts. Right? Concepts, beliefs,
ideas, knowledge or experience, or what appeals to us.
Communism appeals to one person and does not appeal to the
other; one person believes in God and another does not believe in
God. These are all concepts, Utopias, and on that level we live.
Now, are they of any value? Being on an abstract level, conceptual,
have they any value? Have they any significance in daily life? Life
means living: living means relationship; relationship means
contact; contact means co-operation. Have concepts of any kind
any significance, in that sense, in relationship? But the only
relationship we have is conceptual. Right?
Questioner: Then we have to find a right relationship.
Krishnamurti: No, it is not a question of right relationship, Sir.
We are just examining. Do please understand this, Sirs. Let us go
into it slowly. Don't let us jump. We live in concepts, our life is
conceptual. We know what we mean by "conceptual" so we do not
have to analyse that word. And so there is an actual daily living
and a conceptual living. Or, is all living conceptual? Do I live
according to my concepts? One person believes, let us suppose,
that one must be non-violent.

Questioner: I have not met anyone who actually believes in
violence.
Krishnamurti: All right, Sir. My question is: Is all living
conceptual?
Questioner: The building of a concept is due to habit and
becomes a habit.
Krishnamurti: Perhaps we shall be able to come to that question
later, if we can tackle this problem first. Our question is: Is all my
living conceptual?
Questioner: Is there no such thing as spontaneous living?
Krishnamurti: There is conceptual living and spontaneous
living, but do I know what spontaneous living is when I am so
conditioned, when I have inherited so many traditions? - is there
and spontaneity left? Whether you have one con- cept or a dozen, it
is still a question of concepts. Please Sirs, do hold to this for a
minute. Is all life, all living, all relationship merely conceptual?
Questioner: How can that be?
Krishnamurti: Have you not an idea, Sir, that you should live
this way and not that way? Therefore when you say "I must do this
and I must not do that" - it is conceptual. So, is all living
conceptual or is there a difference between nonconceptual living
and conceptual living - and hence a conflict between the two?
Questioner: I would say that we have a concept, but after
experience the concept is modified.
Krishnamurti: Yes Sir, Concepts are modified, obviously modified, changed a little; but is conceptual living different from
daily living or...
Questioner: It is different.

Krishnamurti: Wait Sir, wait Sir! I want to analyse this a little
more. Is conceptual living different from daily living, or is there a
gap between the two? I say there is a gap. What is this gap? Why
should there be a gap?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: That's it. My concept is different from the
actuality that is taking place now. Right? So there is an interval, a
gap between what is, and what should be, or the concept. I am still
sticking to the word "concept".
Questioner: When you talk about "the actuality", that, to me, is
the concept.
Krishnamurti: No Sir. When you have toothache it is not a
concept. When I have toothache it is not a concept. It is an
actuality. When I am hungry, it is not a concept. When I have
sexual desire, it is not a concept. But the next moment I say "No, I
must not" or "I must", "It is evil", or "It is good". So there is a
division between the actual, and what is, and the conceptual. So
there is a duality. Right?
Questioner: If I am hungry it is not just a concept.
Krishnamurti: That is what we are saying, Sir. The primary
urges, hunger, sex and so on, are actual, but we also have concepts
about them. Concepts of class division, and so on. So, we are
trying to find out why this gap exists and if it is possible to live
without this gap, to live only with what is. Right? That is what we
are trying to find out.
Questioner: Animals just eat when they are hungry.
Krishnamurti: But you and I are not animals. We may be at
moments, but actually, now, we are not animals. So do not let us

go back to animals, babies and previous generations; let us stick to
ourselves. So there is the actual moment of living and the
ideational, conceptual, non-factual living. Right Sirs? I believe in
something, but that belief has nothing to do with the actuality,
though the actuality may have produced the belief; the actual is not
related to that belief. "I believe in universal brotherhood." God
knows who can believe it, but I say, "I believe in universal
brotherhood" - but actually I am competing with you. So the
actuality of competition with you is entirely different from the
conceptual.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: We have made it fairly clear up to now. The
actual is, "what is" - the factual. There is hunger in this country,
poverty, overpopulation, corruption, inefficiency, brutality, and all
the rest of it. That is the fact, but the ideation is that we should not
be that. Right? In our daily life the "actual", the "what is", the
"factual" is something entirely different from the real fact; it is the
conceptual. Right?
Questioner: But what you call the actual is just another concept,
surely.
Krishnamurti: No. I am hungry - that is not a concept, I am
hungry. It is not born out of a memory of yesterday's hunger. If it is
born out of yesterday's hunger it is not actual. Take sex - you do
not mind my talking about sex do you? We all... but never mind.
(Laughter) The sexual urge may or may not be there, but it is
stimulated into being by the image which is fictional, not actual. So
I am asking why do we have the conceptual at all?
Questioner: Perhaps it is...

Krishnamurti: No, no, Sir. Don t just answer me but find out if
you have a concept at all. Why do I have a concept at all?
Questioner: There are some things like anger which are
psychological...
Krishnamurti: All that is related, Sir. When I am angry, when
there is irritation - it is a fact. It is there. But the moment I say, "It
must not be there" it becomes conceptual. If you say "Well, the
Indian starvation can only be solved by a particular political party,"
then it is conceptual - then you are not dealing with the fact. The
Communist, the Socialist, the Congressman - whatever the parties
are, they all think they will solve the problem of starvation if you
follow their method - which is sheer nonsense, of course.
Starvation is the fact and the conceptual is the idea, the method, the
system. So I am asking myself, why do I have concepts at all?
(Don't answer me, Sirs. Ask yourself that question.) Why do you
believe in the Masters, the Gurus, in God, in the perfect state?
Why?
Questioner: I wonder if...
Krishnamurti: Listen to what the first gentleman says. He says
that by having a concept I reform myself. Everybody thinks that,
not only you. By having an ideal, a goal, a principle, a hero, and so
on, you think you will be helped to improve yourself. Now, what
does this do actually, does it improve you or does it create conflict,
conflict between what is and what should be?
Questioner: We are afraid, and therefore we retreat into these
concepts.
Krishnamurti: All right. Now, can we live without concepts?
Please let us go on, step by step. Can you live without a belief -

follow this slowly - without a concept, without hope or despair?
Questioner: Surely we must have some beliefs...
Krishnamurti: Go into it, find out. Find out why you have
concepts, first. Is it because you are afraid?
Questioner: One has to battle with others for the primary needs
of life.
Krishnamurti: You say one has to battle.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: You haven't answered the other gentleman's
question. You have no respect for each other in this questioning!
Let us find out what the other chap wants. You know there are two
theories about this, one concerns "the survival of the fittest", which
implies everlasting battle, wars, the superior race, the perfect
concept, and so on. Then there is the other, that through violence
there can be no change at all - in the most fundamental sense of
that word. I do not know why you have any belief about this, one
way or the other. The actual fact is that to survive at all in the
world you have to battle, either very cunningly, cleverly, brutally
or very subtly exploiting people in a nice gentle way. That is the
fact. And why do we have a concept about it or about anything
else?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: (Wait, wait Sir. Go slowly. You are much too
quick. Go slowly.) First there is, as one observes in one's daily life,
the non-conceptual and the conceptual, and I ask myself - and I
hope you are asking yourself too - why do I have concepts at all belief that Communism or Capitalism is the most wonderful way of
life? Why? Or the concept that there is God or there is no God.

Why do we have concepts at all, including concepts of Rama and
Sita?
Questioner: Without concepts we would be in a state of
vacuum. Krishnamurti: Have you found that out? Is that a fact? Is
that so? You are really not being very serious in going into this
question. You have to be very precise and very clear, and not just
jump from one concept to another. You are not answering the
question. Why do you have, if you do have, any concept at all?
You want to escape from the actual, from the "what is", don't you?
(That is what that gentleman says, Sir... Let us understand that
question first. "To escape from what is.") Why do you want to
escape from what is? You would not want to escape from what is if
it were pleasurable. You only want to escape from what is when it
is painful.
Questioner: We do not exactly know "what is", and we are
trying to understand.
Krishnamurti: Don t you know what is? And what do you mean
by trying? Don't you have stomachache? Don't you get angry?
Aren't you frightened, aren't you miserable, aren't you confused?
Those are actual facts, Sir, there is nothing that requires you "to
try" about them. Do consider all this, Sirs. If it were only a case of
pleasure we would not have concepts at all. We would just say
"Give me everything that will give me pleasure and don't bother
about anything else." But if it is painful we want to escape from
what is, into a concept. This is our daily life, Sirs. There is nothing
to argue about. So your Gods, your beliefs, your ideals, principles
are an escape from the daily misery, daily fears, daily anxieties. So,
to understand something, cannot we ask: "Are concepts

necessary?" You understand, Sir? I am afraid, and I see the
absurdity of escaping from that into something which is a concept,
a belief in the Masters, in God, in the Hereafter, into leading a
perfect life - you know, all that stuff. Why can't I look at that fear?
Why do I have to have concepts at all? And do not concepts
prevent me from looking at that fear? Right Sirs? So concepts are a
barrier; they act as a barrier which prevents you from looking.
Questioner: Please clarify what you have said.
Krishnamurti: Clarify what?
Questioner: Please make a clearer analysis. Krishnamurti: A
clearer analysis? Perhaps you would do it yourself, Sir.
Questioner: You do it better than I.
Krishnamurti: What does it matter, who does it better or worse?
What is important is whether we understand this thing clearly. It is
fairly simple, Sirs. My life is very dull. I live in a shoddy little
house with an ugly little wife and I am miserable, anxious, and I
want satisfaction, I want happiness, I want a glimpse, a moment of
inexpressible bliss, and so I escape to something which I can call
X. That is the whole principle, isn't it? That does not need further
explanation, does it? And I live there, in an ideological world, a
world which I have conceived, or inherited, or been told about.
And thinking and living in that abstraction gives me a great delight.
It is an escape from the actual daily boredom of life. Right? Then I
say to myself, "Why do I have to escape?" Why can't I live and
understand this terrible boredom? Why do I waste my energies in
escaping?..
You are all silent about this!
Questioner: You are conceiving a different form of existence

from anything we know.
Krishnamurti: I am not conceiving anything. I say, look. And I
am looking at this fact that I have escaped, that I am escaping, and
I see how absurd it is. I have to deal with what is, and to deal with
what is I need energy. Therefore I will not escape. Escape is a
waste of energy. So, I will have nothing whatsoever to do with
beliefs, Gods, concepts. I will have no concept at all. (Of course
not, Sir, of course not.) If you burn your finger, and the pain
creates a concept that you must never put your finger in the fire,
then that concept has value, doesn't it? You have also had wars,
thousands of wars. Why haven't you learnt from that not to have
any more wars? (Come off it, Sir. You know very well what I
mean.) We don't have to analyse all this every step as we go along.
I burn my finger, and I say to myself I must be careful hereafter.
Or, you tread on my toe, both metaphorically and physically, and I
get angry physically, and I boil inwardly. I have learnt something
from that, and I say, "I must not", or "I must". (It is the same thing.
Avoid, build a resistance. I understand those things very clearly.
They are necessary.)
Questioner: When someone makes me angry I remember it and
when I meet him next time I am ready for him.
Krishnamurti: That's it, Sir! That's just it! Can I meet him
without the concept next time? He might have changed, but if I
meet him with my concept, that he has trodden on my toe, I have
no relationship with him. Therefore, is it possible, though you have
had some sort of experience, is it possible to be without the
concept? So we must come back to the question - "Is it possible to
live in this world without any concept?"

Questioner: I don't think so.
Krishnamurti: Do not let us say it is possible or it is not
possible. Let us find out. You have separated yourselves from
others, Sirs, as Hindus. This is a concept. (Yes, you are! My God,
you are.) Would you marry your daughter to a Muslim? Let us be
clear. I am taking an instance, Sir. You hurt me, and that hurt
remains in my memory. I try to avoid you if I can. But
unfortunately as you live in the same house or the same street I
have to meet you every day. And I have an image, the crystallized
image, thickened memory, which is meeting you every day. Hence
there is a battle going on between us two. And so I say to myself, is
it possible to live without that image, so that I really meet you?
You might have changed or you might not have changed, but I will
not have the image. Can I not find out how to live without the
image, so that my mind is not cluttered up with images? Do you
follow, Sirs. So that my mind is free, free to look, to enjoy, to live.
Questioner: That's an idea.
Krishnamurti: Oh no! To you it is an idea, but not to me. I say,
"He has hurt me, but why should I carry on that burden?"
Questioner: I just take care next time. Krishnamurti: Yes, but I
won't keep on repeating, "I must be careful", which only thickens
the memory. I say that is no way to live, but I only say so for me,
not for you. I don't want that image and to be carrying it with me
all the time. That is not freedom. You may have changed, and also
I like to be without an image. Not as an idea, but it is an actual fact
that I do not want it. It is absurd for me to have an image about
anybody. So let us come back to the other things.
Questioner: If I meet a good man, is it not a good thing to have

a memory, an impression that he is a good man?
Krishnamurti: A bad impression or a good impression is still an
impression. There is no "good image" and "bad image". (Inaudible
remark) (For bad eyesight you must go to a better oculist.) This
division between the conceptual and the actual breeds conflict. And
a man who wants to investigate and go beyond the actual must
have all his energy. That energy cannot be wasted through conflict.
So I say to myself - and I am not telling you what to do - I say to
myself, "It is absurd to live with concepts at all." I will deal with
facts, with what. is, all the time, and will never be immersed in the
concept. So then I am faced with the question, "How do I look at
the fact, at what is?" I am not concerned with the conceptual at all.
I am only concerned in the observation of actually what is. Right?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: (Yes, but you take things as they come with a
series of habits. Habits of which you may be conscious or
unconscious... Sirs, we keep going away from the main issue.) So
the question is, "Can I live with what is, without creating conflict?"
Do you follow? I am angry. That is a fact. I am jealous. I like and
dislike. That is a fact. Can I live with that, with what is, without
making a problem, a conflict out of it?
Questioner: It is not a very happy thought for me! I am at a
loss... (inaudible) Krishnamurti: The gentleman says he is at a loss
because he is at a certain level and his wife, children and neighbour
are at another level - higher or inferior. And so, he says, there is no
co-operation. I carry on and they carry on. That is what we are all
doing, Sir. So then, what?.. You see, we will not come to the
central issue, which is, "Can I live, without conflict, with what is?"

And not go to sleep, because conflict, apparently does keep one
half-awake. I am asking, "Is it possible to live with what is, without
conflict, and to go beyond it?" I am jealous. That is a fact. I see that
in my life. I am jealous of my wife, jealous of the man who has
more, more of worldly goods and of intellect - I am envious. I
know how envy comes. It comes through comparison - but I do not
have to analyse how envy arises. Now can I live with that,
understand it, not have concepts about it? So that after looking at it,
so that by understanding it, studying its structure and nature I have
really understood it and so can go beyond it, so that envy never
touches the mind again? You see, you are not interested in it. You
really are not interested in it, are you?
Questioner: Yes we are. If we were not interested we would not
be here, but we are not in contact with you.
Krishnamurti: Why? Why are you not in contact with the
speaker and what he is saying? He has questioned very clearly,
whether it is possible to live without concepts? And he took the
example of envy. We know the nature and the structure of envy.
Now can you live with it, and go beyond it, without conflict? So
why are you not in contact with what the speaker is saying? If you
are not in contact (not you, not you personally Sir), it may be
because you like envy. (Inaudible) Look, Sirs - what happens? I am
envious. That envy arises through measurement. I have little and
you have more, or I am dull and you are very clever. I have a low
position and you have a high position, you have a car and I have no
car. So, through comparison, through measurement this envy
arises. Right? Is not that clear? So, can I live without
measurement? This is not a concept.

Questioner: It is a question of reconciling ourselves to the fact
that there is inequality. Krishnamurti: You are not reconciling, Sir.
I am asking you a question and you are talking about a
reconciliation between black and white. Then you only produce
grey. (Laughter) I am asking quite a different question. Do please
listen, Sir. Can you live your daily life at the office, at home,
without any measurement, without any comparison? No? Why do
you have comparison? Because you have been conditioned from
childhood to compare. Follow this, Sirs. It has become a habit, and
you keep on repeating that habit. And though that habit creates
misery, confusion and all the rest of it, you don't care. You carry on
with the habit. Now, what will make you aware of the nature of
this habit of comparison? Somebody forcing you to be aware of the
habit? If the Government were to say, "You must not be envious",
you would then find other ways of being envious, more subtle
ones. Religions have tried this, but you have overcome all
religions. So by forcing you to be non-envious you will revolt
against it, and the revolt is violence. You understand, Sirs? If I
force you into a corner and say, "You must do this", then you will
kick me. But if you become aware of the habit you have cultivated
for forty, twenty or ten years of comparing yourself with another,
then what takes place? You see, you are not interested in this. I
have lost you. Because you are not interested in breaking down
your habits. The Communist has his habits, and the nonCommunist has his habits, and those two are going to battle with
each other. That is what is going on in the world. You have your
habit in believing in something, and I have no habit in belief. So,
what is our relationship? None at all!

So we come back to a very simple thing, and God knows why
you sit here and listen. Is this becoming a habit?
Questioner: We hope so.
Krishnamurti: You hope it will become a habit!
Questioner: We hope to get illumination.
Krishnamurti: You won't. Sir, to get illumination you must have
a clear mind, you must be able to look.
Questioner: You said... (inaudible) Krishnamurti: No Sir, I did
not say that. I did not say that. I will not go back through all that
again - it is useless. You see you will not face the actuality, the
"what is"! You want to live in concepts, and I do not want to live in
concepts. For Heaven's sake: love is not a concept. And because
you have no love, you live in concepts. (And you all shake your
heads and agree and go on with your habits.) So why do you listen,
why do you come here, because when we talk about these real
things you are off - away at some tangent! Unfortunately, or
fortunately, the speaker has talked for forty-two years. And when it
comes to the point - which is to live without envy - you are not
there!
Questioner: The truth is we don't want to be disturbed.
Krishnamurti: Then don't be disturbed. Go away! Why do you
come? You are not going to get any "poonyum" out of this,
poonyum being merit. Here is a fundamental issue, and please do
listen. It is a fundamental issue - to live without conflict, but not go
to sleep. To live without the concept requires extraordinary
intelligence and a great deal of energy. And I say that when you
live in concepts you are wasting energy. And you say, "Oh, that's a
very nice idea", and you still live there in concepts. You say, "I am

a Communist, I believe in God, I don't believe in God and so on."
And so I say to myself, "What is wrong?"
Questioner: There is an urge to know more.
Krishnamurti: Then pick up an encyclopedia or a dictionary and
you will know more. To know more truly, means to know more
about oneself. Otherwise there is only ignorance. You may be
technologically brilliant, but if you do not know about yourself you
are an ignorant person. Here I am, and I say, "I must know why I
live in concepts. I want to analyse it, to understand it." Not that I
must or must not live in concepts, but I want to know why. And
when I look I know why. Because my life is so shoddy, mediocre,
petty, and to escape from that I go off into concepts - and I have
lovely concepts, immense concepts, concepts invented by Lenin, or
Trotsky or Nehru or Gandhi, it does not matter who. I escape into
those but I am still angry, I am still envious, I am still bored. So,
why should I live in concepts at all? So I say,"I won't, because it is
stupid." I will not do it! But you don't say that.
Questioner: Do we understand the meaning of the word?
Krishnamurti: I'm afraid we do not understand about anything.
So we will have to re-start. Too bad!
Questioner: It is something which needs going into and we must
think about it.
Krishnamurti: Really! If I hit you, you will know about that! If
you are insulted, or have pain, you do not say you will think about
it. This is all so obvious, but you quote a platitude and think you
have understood it. So we lose contact with each other when we
are not talking about concepts. When we talk about concepts, we
are in contact. When we talked about God (if I was foolish enough

to talk about God), then we were both in contact. But when you
come down to an actual fact - of greed, envy - then we lose contact.
Do you know, Sirs, what is happening in the world? The world
being India also. How India is degenerating, don't you know it?
Not only here, but in the world. And probably you cannot do
anything about it. At least, there can be a few who will keep the
light burning. That is all. But that is up to you, Sirs.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VI CHAPTER 2 2ND PUBLIC DIALOGUE
MADRAS 5TH JANUARY 1968 'THE PURSUIT
OF PLEASURE'
Krishnamurti: What shall we talk over together this morning?
(Pause).
Questioner: May we pursue what we talked about last time we
met here, with regard to concepts? Can we live without concepts,
beliefs?
Krishnamurti: Do you not think that before we can go into that
or any other question it is important to question, to question
critically, not only someone else, but, what is much more
important, to be critically self-aware. It seems to me much more
important to question one's own motives, one's attitudes, beliefs,
ways of life, habits, traditions, the way one thinks and why one
thinks in that way. Because I do not see how we can have sanity if
we are not aware of our own reasoning or non-reasoning, if we are
not aware of our own emotional attitudes and our narrow or wide
beliefs. I do not see how we can bring about any kind of sanity in
our lives (sanity being a way of living which is fairly healthy)
unless we are critically aware of what we are talking about, and
therefore questioning everything, not accepting a thing about
ourselves or others. I think if we could start from that - which does
not mean that we must be sceptical about everything as this would
be another form of insanity. But if we can question, then I think
what we shall discover, talking it over together this morning, will
have some value.

Questioner: Can we continue with what you have just said?
Questioner: Will you take up the subject of space and time?
Questioner: Will you explain about the doctor who took L.S.D.
and destroyed a space within himself, in terms of the observer and
the observed?
Questioner: Could we discuss envy, and its activities?
Krishnamurti: Sir, if I may ask you a question - What is your
deep, fundamental, lasting interest in life?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Is that your deep fundamental interest, Sir?
Rather feeble isn't it? If you skipped all these double, indirect,
oblique questions which are beside the point and if you dealt with
one question directly and honestly, would you know what is your
fundamental, lasting, total interest?
Questioner: To be free.
Questioner: We want to be happy.
Questioner: I am really interested in myself...
Krishnamurti: ...as most of us are, interested in my progress,
interested in my job, interested in my little family, getting a better
position, more prestige, more power, dominating others, and so on
and so on. I think it would be logical, would it not, to admit to
yourselves that that is what most of us are interested in - me first,
and everyone else second.
Questioner: And that is very wrong.
Krishnamurti: I do not think it is wrong. What is there wrong
about it? You see, Sir, that is what we are doing all the time. Now
let us take that fact. Most of us are interested, in the little corner in
which we live, not only outwardly but inwardly. We are interested

in it, but we never decently, honestly, admit that to ourselves. If we
do, we are rather ashamed of it and so we add such comments as:
"I do not think it is right", "It is wrong", "It does not help
mankind", and all that blaa. So there it is. One is interested in
oneself fundamentally and one thinks it is wrong (for various
reasons, ideologically, traditionally, and so on). The actual daily
fact is that one is interested in oneself, and you think it is wrong.
But what you think is irrelevant, it has no validity at all. Why
introduce that factor? Why say "It is wrong"? That is an idea, is it
not? - it is a concept. What is is the fact, which is that one is
interested in oneself.
Questioner: I don't know if it's all right to ask a question.
Krishnamurti: Quite right. Go ahead, Sir.
Questioner: When I do something for others I feel more
satisfied. I see that to be so self-concerned is not satisfactory, but to
work in a school or to help another is more satisfactory than to
think about oneself, which is not quite so satisfying.
Krishnamurti: What is the difference? You want satisfaction which is self-concern. Follow this out, Sir, for yourself. If you are
seeking satisfaction in helping others and therefore that gives
greater satisfaction, you are still concerned about yourself, about
what will give you greater satisfaction. Why bring any ideological
concept into it? One wants freedom because it is much more
satisfying and to live a petty little life is not so satisfactory. So why
have this double thinking? Why say one is satisfactory and the
other is not. You understand, Sir? Why not say - I really want
satisfaction, whether it is in sex, in freedom, or helping others, in
becoming a great saint, or politician, or engineer, or lawyer. It is all

the same process, is it not? Satisfaction in many ways, both subtle
and obvious, that is what we want. Right? When we say we want
freedom we want it because we think perhaps it may be terribly
satisfying; and the ultimate satisfaction, of course, is this peculiar
idea of self-realization.
Questioner: So we must get rid of this search for satisfaction.
Krishnamurti: Ah, no Sir. Wait Sir. To get rid of satisfaction is
not freedom. Freedom is something entirely different; not
something to be had from something. If I get rid of or free myself
from satisfaction, I am freeing myself from it because I seek a
much greater satisfaction. No? So why not find out why we want
satisfaction? Not that "we should not", that is only a concept, a
formula, and hence there is contradiction, and therefore conflict. So
let us take this one thing. Most of us want, desire, search for, crave
for satisfaction. Right? Questioner: I don't think so.
Krishnamurti: You don't think so. Why not, Sir?
Questioner: I am not interested specially in satisfaction, but I
would like to know why I am dissatisfied.
Krishnamurti: (Oh! my lord!) How do you know that you are
dissatisfied. Because you have known satisfaction! (Laughter)
Don't laugh Sirs, for goodness sake, don't laugh. This is not a
clever weaving of argument, please. Why am I dissatisfied?
Because I am married and that does not give me satisfaction;
because I go to the temple and that does not give me satisfaction;
(follow all this). I go to meetings and that means nothing; I look at
trees and feel nothing; and so gradually I am dissatisfied with
everything I see, or have or have felt. Which means, what? I am
seeking a satisfaction in which there is no dissatisfaction at all!

No? This is not a clever statement; it is obvious, isn't it? No, Sir?
Look, each one of us is seeking satisfaction although he is
dissatisfied. Right? Now, why do we seek satisfaction? - Not that it
is right or it is wrong, but what is the mechanism of this search?
(Long pause.) Do you expect me to analyse it for you?
Questioner: In some spheres we have to seek satisfaction to live.
Krishnamurti: Yes Sir, of course there are basic necessities; but
wait, Sir, before we come to that, can we find out why we seek
satisfaction? Go into it, Sir. What is satisfaction?
Questioner: I think we need some of that awareness of which
you speak in order to distinguish for ourselves what will give us
permanent happiness.
Krishnamurti: Don't just use words, but think it out a little bit,
just think it out. I do not know anything about awareness - out it
goes, if I may suggest it. We are not discussing that, Sir, nor are we
talking about the permanent or the impermanent. We want to find
out why we human beings are always seeking satisfaction.
Questioner: ( The audience suggested many reasons but they
were almost inaudible.) We seek satisfaction because we want to
change. Krishnamurti: Wait a minute, Sirs, just a minute, Sir. Food
satisfies you, doesn't it - having a good meal? Why? Because I'm
hungry, and it is good to get rid of the empty feeling. Move a little
higher, up to sex. Very satisfying, apparently. You are all silent!
Then, having a position in which you can dominate others, that is
also very satisfying, isn't it? You feel powerful, you feel you are in
a position to order others to do things, and so that is very
satisfactory. One seeks different ways of finding gratification through food, sex, position, through various virtues, and so on.

Why? One can understand when you want food that you feel
gratified when you eat it, but why move to another level for
satisfaction; and is there such a thing? I feel satisfied with food, I
want varieties of food, and, if I have the money and appetite for it I
get it. I also want a good position in society, a respected position,
which is very gratifying because there I am secure, with a big
house, a policeman at the gate, and all the rest of it. After that, I
want some more of it - a bigger house and two more policemen,
and so on. Now, what is this craving for gratification? You
understand, Sirs, the craving, what is it? I have a craving for food
and I eat it - if I can get it. But the craving for position - let us take
that one thing. Most of us want position - as the best engineer, or
the best lawyer, or the President of some society, or this or that.
Why? Apart from the money it gives, apart from the comfort, why
this craving?
Questioner: I want to show to others what I can do.
Krishnamurti: Which is, to make the neighbours feel envious!
Questioner: (Several interjections. Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: (Is that it? Wait Sir - you have not heard that
other gentleman, Sir.) If you had not your position you would be
nobody. Strip the Pope of his robes, or the Sannyasi of his tamasha
and he would be nobody. Is that it? So are we afraid of being
nobody, and that is why we want position? To be considered a
great scholar, a philosopher, a teacher? If you find yourself in that
position it is very gratifying - to have your name printed in the
newspaper, and people coming to you and all the rest of it. Is that
why we do all this? That is, inwardly we are just ordinary people
with aching sorrows, conflict, fighting in the family, bitterness,

anxiety and fear which is there constantly. And to have an outward
position where I am regarded as a terribly respectable citizen, that
is very satisfactory. Right? Why do I want this outward position, I
ask, and you say "I want it because in my daily life I am just a
sorry little human being." Right? Is that it? (Long pause).
Questions: (Several inaudible suggestions.)
Krishnamurti: What is actually taking place? We have come to
a certain point, Sir, let us pursue it; this point is that one finds that
one wants a position which will be gratifying because inwardly one
is... just a shoddy little man. But to have a policeman at the gate
gives me tremendous importance. Right? This is obvious, isn't it?
We don't have to go into all that, do we?
Questioner: We have to expose ourselves, Sir.
Krishnamurti: I am exposing you now! You may not want to be
exposed but that is the fact! - I am a sorry little entity inside, with
all sorts of dogmas, beliefs in God, rituals and all that - a whirlpool
of mischief and misery inwardly, and outwardly I want the
policeman at the gate! Now why do I have this craving for outward
position? You understand? Why?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: No Sir. Please go into it. Why do we want? What
is the reason? Don't reduce it to the word "selfishness", Sir.
Questioner: (Long inaudible contribution.)
Krishnamurti: Sir, Sir. Look, Sir! Don't you have a craving fur
position, fur power, fur prestige, to be recognised as a great man,
have fame, notoriety, and so on? Have you not got this desire?
Questioner: (Inaudible remark.)
Krishnamurti: You see how you are escaping from this! Have

you not got this desire, Sir?
Questioner: Yes. Krishnamurti: At last! Now why? Go into it,
Sir. Why? Why do you crave fur a position? Don't say it is due to
circumstances, that I have been put in that position by society, that
I have been conditioned that way.
Questioner: I desire position in the same way as when I am
hungry I want food.
Krishnamurti: Oh no, Sir! Oh no! You see we can't face this
thing at all!
Questioner: Further suggestions. (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Do let us be serious. Throwing in all these words
is so silly. You are not really thinking at all. Sir, here is a very
simple question. Everybody throughout the world wants a position
- whether in society, in the family, or to sit next to God, "on the
right-hand of the Father". Everybody wants a position. There is a
craving fur it. Why?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: No Sir! Don't throw out words. Analyse it, Sir,
don't just answer! Why do you want it?
Questioner: It is natural.
Krishnamurti: It is natural? Oh Sir! You say one thing and then
go on to another. Have you ever noticed animals, Sir? You've got a
chicken yard; have you ever noticed that there is always one
chicken pecking another? There is an order of pecking. So we have
perhaps inherited this thing - to dominate, to be aggressive, to seek
a position is a form of aggression. No? Of course it is. I mean the
saint who seeks a position with regard to his saintliness is as
aggressive as the chicken pecking in the yard! I don't know if you

follow all this. You don't. Perhaps we have inherited this
aggressive urge to dominate, that is, to have a position. Right? And
what does this involve, this aggression, to have a position in
society (a position which must be recognised by others, otherwise
it is no position at all)? I must always sit on the platform. Why?
(Pause) Do please go on with it, Sirs. I am doing all the work. Why
do you have this aggression? (Audience suggests something.) No
Sir. It is not a question of something lacking. Oh, how are we
going to discuss with a group of people who never want to go into
anything.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: That is one of the reasons, Sir. But, let us look at
this, Sir. There is aggression. Right? When I want a position in
society, which is recognised by society, it is a form of aggression.
Now, why am I aggressive?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: You see, you do not apply it to yourself. You do
not find out, in yourself, why you are aggressive. Forget the
"position in society" we have analysed that now. Why are we
aggressive?
Questioner: To reach what we want, what we aim at.
Krishnamurti: And what do you aim at? (We have said that, Sir.
We have moved away from that.) The question now is, why are we
aggressive? Please go into it, Sir. The politician is aggressive, the
big shots are aggressive, whether in business or in religion they are
aggressive - why?
Questioner: Aggressiveness arises from fear.
Krishnamurti: Is that so? Maybe! Find out for yourself, Sir. You

are aggressive in the family. Why? In the office, in the bus, and so
on. Why are you aggressive? Don't explain it, Sir. Just find out
why you are.
Questioner: Why am I afraid to be nothing?
Krishnamurti: Look! As the gentleman said just now, fear may
be the cause of this aggression because society is so constructed
that a citizen who has a position of respect is treated with great
courtesy, whereas a man who has no position at all is kicked
around - sent into the army and to Vietnam, to be killed. So why
are we aggressive? Is it because we are frightened of being
nobodies? Don't answer it, Sirs, go into it! Go into it in yourselves!
Or, we are frightened because it has become a habit. Seeking a
position has become a habit. We are not really frightened, but it has
become a habit. I don't know if you are following this. If it is fear
that makes us aggressive, that is one thing. But it may be the
momentum of society that is making you aggressive. You know
Sirs, they have made an experiment, putting rats, thousands of rats,
in a very small room. And when they are there they lose all sense
of proportion. The mother who is about to have babies, the mother
rat, does not care, because the pressure of space, absence of space,
the fact of so many rats living together makes them crazy. Follow
this. In the same way, if people live in a very, very crowded city
and have no space, it makes them also very aggressive, makes
them violent. Animals do need space to hunt in; they have
territorial rights, like the birds. They establish their territory and
they will hunt any other animal that comes into that territory. So
they have territorial rights, and sexual rights - all animals have this.
And sexual rights do not have such a great importance as territorial

rights. Right? Of course some of you may know all about this. So
we may be aggressive because we have not enough space around
us physically. Are you following all this? And this may be one of
the reasons why we are aggressive. A family living in a small
room, or a small house with ten of you in it, you explode, get angry
about nothing. So man must have space, and because he has not
enough physical space, that may be one of the reasons for
aggression. And also one may be aggressive because one is
frightened. Now to which category do you belong? Are you
aggressive because you are frightened?
Questioner: (Suggestion inaudible.)
Krishnamurti: So, you are saying, guarantee my physical
security and then I will not be aggressive. But is there such a thing
as guaranteed security in life? And so that may be the basic reason
why we are frightened - knowing that there is no such lasting
security. In Vietnam there is no security. You may have a little
security here but where there is war there is no security and, when
an earthquake comes, it destroys everything - and so on. So, go
into this yourselves, Sirs, and find out whether your aggression is
born of fear, or of the fact that you are enclosed tightly, both
outwardly and inwardly. Inwardly you have no freedom intellectually you are not free, you repeat what others have said.
Technological inventions, society, the community, all that is felt
constantly as a pressure on you which you are not capable of
meeting and therefore you explode, you feel frustrated. Now,
which is it - to which category do you belong? Find out, Sirs.
(Long pause.) If you are frightened, and therefore you are
aggressive, how are you going to deal with fear? And if you are

free of fear will you lose the pleasure of being aggressive? And
knowing that you will lose the pleasure of being aggressive, you do
not mind being afraid. Right? Do you follow this? (Pause.) Fear is
unpleasant and aggressiveness is more pleasant. Right? And so I do
not mind being a little bit afraid because aggressiveness with its
pleasure balances fear.
Questioner: I am aware of the difficulties of the situation.
Krishnamurti: Ah, I don't know what you are aware of, Sir. Go
into it. I am just asking you. So you may prefer to be aggressive,
but at the same time be afraid. So you really don't mind being
afraid or being aggressive.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Sirs, this is a Very difficult question because
each one will interpret aggressiveness in his own way. But if we
could face this question of fear and see if we can understand fear
and see whether there is a possibility of being free from fear, then
when that is gone through, then would there be aggressiveness your kind, my kind, his kind or her kind? You follow Sir? So let us
take that one thing. Is fear causing aggressiveness? Obviously it is.
I am afraid of not having any belief and therefore I am aggressive
about the belief I have. So fear has produced aggressiveness with
regard to belief! That is simple. Right? (Are you all having an
early-morning sleep, or what!) So, is it possible to be free of fear?
(At last!) One only puts that question when one really wants to be
free of fear. Is it possible to live without fear? It is a very complex
problem. It is not a matter of saying, "Yes, we must live without
fear" and make a lot of platitudes about it. But can one live without
fear? What does it mean? Physically, what does it mean? We will

go step by step. What does it mean physically to live without fear?
Is it possible, in this society as it is constructed, in a culture of this
kind, whether the culture is Communist or the present culture, or
an ancient culture, is it possible to live in a society without fear?
Questioner: It is not possible.
Krishnamurti: Why? Most extraordinary, Sirs! When one comes
to basic questions you are all very silent.
Questioner: I'm only thinking of what would happen to my life.
Krishnamurti: Are you afraid that if you had lasting security in a
stable society, you would have no fear. (Inaudible) (Yes Sir. That
is understood, Sir.) So, you will not be afraid if you can have a
guarantee that the life, the daily existence you are used to will not
be disturbed from the pattern you are used to. Right? And on that
basis we build a society. Obviously. That is what the Communists
have done. So you say it is not possible to live in a society without
fear. Is that so? No?
Questioner: I think it must be possible but I don't know how to
do it.
Krishnamurti: Ah! If you think it must be possible, that is only a
concept. The fact is that one is afraid to live in a society as it is,
without fear. Right?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: (We are doing that, Sir. That is what we are
discussing, Sir.) One of our fears is that to live in a society one has
to be aggressive. Let us for the moment accept that - that to live in
a society of any kind, Communist, Capitalist, or Hindu or Moslem
you have to be aggressive and therefore frightened in order to
survive at all. Leave it there. Now at what other level of our

existence are we afraid? I can understand that I am afraid that I
may not have enough food for tomorrow and therefore I lay up
stores for a month or for two days and I am going to guard it and to
see that nobody steals it. And I'm afraid that the Government will
come along and do something or other, and so I am afraid. I can
understand that. Now are we only aggressive there, at that level.
Are we only afraid at that level?
Questioner: Inwardly we are also the same. Krishnamurti: What
do we mean by "inwardly"? What does that mean Sir?
Questioner: (Inaudible. Several comments.)
Krishnamurti: So there is fear at another level. It is suggested
that there is fear in relationship, and therefore we are aggressive in
relationship. Now why are we afraid in relationship? (I don't know
what "truthful" means, Sir.) Why are we afraid in relationship? Are
you afraid of your wife, or your husband, or your neighbour, or
your boss? I know it's a rather awful thing to admit that you are
afraid of your wife! One is afraid in every kind of relationship.
Why?
Questioner: (inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Why am I afraid? Please do be simple about it
because it becomes very complex presently and if we are
not simple at the beginning we shall not understand anything.
Why am I afraid of my wife or my neighbour, or my boss (which is
relationship) - why?
Questioner: (Several comments, inaudible.)
Krishnamurti: My dear chap you're not married! So leave it for
the moment. Your calamity will come presently!
Questioner: There is fear in relationship because "he" or "she"

or "my boss" can withhold something from me. (Further comment
inaudible.)
Krishnamurti: How are you going to discuss this when you
won't go step by step! Don't jump, don't conclude. Are you afraid
of your neighbour, of your boss? Fear - you know. He might take
away your job. He might not give you a rise, he might not
encourage you. And also you are maybe afraid of your wife
because she dominates, she nags, she bullies, she is not pretty. So
one is afraid. Why? Because one yearns for continuity. Let us go
slower than that. I am sorry to insist on going very slowly, step by
step. I am afraid of my wife, why? I am afraid because - it is very
simple - she bullies me and I don't like to be bullied. I am fairly
sensitive and she is aggressive, and I'm tied to her through
ceremony, through marriage, through children. And so I am
frightened. She dominates me and I don't like it. Right Sirs? I am
frightened for that reason, because I am fairly sensitive and I like
to do things differently. I like to look at trees, I like to play with the
children, I like to go to the office late, or do this or that, and she
bullies me, and I don't like to be bullied. So I have the beginning of
fear of her. Right? And also, if I retaliate and say "Don't bully me"
she will withhold her sexual pleasure, my pleasure with her. So I
am frightened of that. Right Sirs? Still you are all very silent about
this! You are an extraordinary generation! I am frightened because
she wants to pick a quarrel with me, and so on. So what shall I do?
I am frightened and I am supposed to be related to her. She
dominates me, she bullies me, and she orders me about, she has
contempt for me. And, if I am a strong man, I have contempt for
her. You know! So what shall I do? I am frightened. Do I

acknowledge that fact, or do I cover it up and say "It's my karma",
"It's my conditioning", you know - you complain against society
and your environment.
Questioner: I suppose one has to suffer in silence.
Krishnamurti: Suffer in silence! You do that anyhow.
Questioner: Divorce her!
Krishnamurti: Divorce is rather expensive and takes too long, so
what will you do?
Questioner: Put up with it.
Krishnamurti: Now what takes place? Follow it, Sirs. What
takes place? You are frightened and you put up with it. So what is
happening to you? You are frightened and you get used to this fear.
You get used to the bullying, used to the environment, so gradually
you become duller and duller. Gradually you lose all sensitivity.
You don't look at trees which you looked at before, you never
smile. So gradually you become dull. That is exactly what has
happened with you gentlemen and ladies. Because you have got
used to it. You have got used to this rotten society, to the filthy
streets. You look neither at the filthy streets nor at the lovely sky of
an evening. So, fear (your not having understood it) reduces you to
dullness. What will you do, Sirs! Don't just say "Yes, you're
perfectly right". The doctor has diagnosed your disease and he asks
what you are going to do? You have got used to the Upanishads,
the Gita, the dirt, the squalor, the bullying of the wife, the bullying
of the politicians, you have become totally insensitive, dull. You
may cleverly give lectures, and read and quote and all that, but
inwardly you are dull. So what will you do? (Pause) No answer?
Questioner: Get rid of it all.

Krishnamurti: How? With a lovely gesture?
Questioner: Get rid of the relationship.
Krishnamurti: Walk out on her, and on the children? And fall
into another trap? So what will you do, Sir?
Questioner: Find out why she bullies me.
Krishnamurti: She won t tell me. She has her own miseries. She
has God knows what problems. She is unsatisfied, perhaps,
sexually. Perhaps she is ill - Oh, a dozen things there may be. You
know, she feels she must have a rest, have a holiday, have some
time without her husband, away from him, take a holiday. So I
can't find out from her why she bullies me. I have to deal with
myself, first. Gosh. You people are so... So, what shall I do?
Questioner: Resist her.
Krishnamurti: I can't do that.
Questioner: Try to reconcile.
Krishnamurti: Oh my God! She keeps to her character and I
keep to mine. So what shall I do?
Questioner: You become indifferent.
Krishnamurti: That is what you have already done. You are
completely indifferent to everything - to the trees, to the beauty, to
the rain, to the clouds, to the dirt, to the wife, to the children. You
are completely indifferent.
Questioner: Maybe we have to doubt everything that we have
accepted up to now.
Krishnamurti: Look Sir, it's a much more serious problem than
just this verbal exchange. Because you have become indifferent,
callous - through fear, through bullying by the Gods, the
Upanishads, the Gita, by the politician, by the wife. You have

become dull, haven't you? So how do you awaken to this dullness
and throw it out? You understand my question? I have been made
dull by my wife, by the repetitions of the blasted sacred books, by
the society in which I live, I have become completely indifferent. I
don't care what happens to me or what happens to others. I have
become callous, hard. I recognise that. That is a fact. You may not
recognise it. You may say, "Well I may have little spots here and
there which are fairly sensitive". Those little spots have no value at
all, when the major field is dull. So, what shall I do? I recognise
that as a fact. And the question is not how to get rid of it! I don't
condemn it. I say, "That is a fact." So what shall I do? Well, Sirs.
What shall I do?
Questioner: I feel helpless.
Krishnamurti: Then you cannot do anything, and then you have
the whole state of India as it is! Now I want to do something; I
really do. You, your Gods, your religious books, society, the
culture in which you have grown up, all these have made me
incredibly callous and indifferent. So what shall I do? Well, Sirs.
What shall I do?
Questioner: Break with the whole thing.
Krishnamurti: Break? I'm afraid to break, am I not? First of all,
am I conscious, am I aware that I am indifferent? Are you, Sirs?
(What a generation you are!) (Long pause.) All right, Sirs, I will go
through it. I have become callous, and I see the reasons for this in
my wife, my family, overpopulation, the enormous weight of ten
thousand years of traditions, the endless rituals, the squalor inside
the house and outside the house, and so on. I see the reasons why
the mind has been made dull, through education and so on. That's a

fact. Now what shall I do? First of all, I do not want to live that
way. Right? I cannot live that way. It is worse than an animal. (Oh!
you are not interested.)
Questioner: Please go on. Krishnamurti: So first I see the cause,
and the effect, and I see it is impossible to live that way. Now what
makes me say, It is impossible to live that way"? Please follow all
this. (Sirs, please don't cough.) This requires great attention. What
makes me say, "I must not live that way"? (Long pause.) I am
insensitive. If it is painful and I want to change, then I am changing
because I think something else will give me greater pleasure. (Oh!
you don't see all this!)I want to change because I see that a mind
that is so dull is really not existing and there must be change. If I
change because it is painful - follow this, please - if I change
because it is painful then I am pursuing pleasure. Right? And the
pursuit of pleasure has been the cause of this indifference. This
indifference has been caused because I have sought pleasure pleasure in the family, in the Gods, in the Upanishads, Koran,
Bible, in the Establishment. And all that has reduced me to this indifference. The origin of the movement was pleasure, and if I
revolt against this it will again be the pursuit of pleasure!
Are you following all this? I have realized something! I have
realized that if I change with a motive of pleasure I shall be back in
the same circle. Please, Sirs, do understand this - with your hearts,
not with your silly little minds. Understand this with your hearts that when you have started to seek pleasure you must end up in
catastrophe, which is dullness. If you break away from that
dullness because you want a different kind of pleasure then you are
back in the same circle. So I say, "Look what I'm doing!" So I have

to be very watchful of pleasure. I'm not going to deny it, because if
I deny it I am seeking another, greater pleasure. So I see that
pleasure reduces the mind to habits which bring about complete
dullness. I hang up that picture on the wall because it has given me
great pleasure. I have looked at it in the museum or in the gallery
and I say, "What a lovely picture that is!" I buy it, if I have the
money, and hang it up in my room. I look at it every day - and say
"How nice". Then I get used to it. You understand? So the pleasure
of looking at it every day has brought about a habit which now
prevents me from looking. I don't know if you see this. Like sex!
So habit, getting used to something, is the beginning of
indifference. Are you following all this? You get used to the
squalor of the next village as you pass it every day. The little boys
and the little girls making messes on the road - the dirt, the squalor,
the filth. You get used to it, and then you have got used to it. In the
same way you have got used to the beauty of a tree, you simply do
not see it any more. So, I have discovered that where I pursue
pleasure there must be, deeply in it, the root of indifference. Oh! do
please see this! There are no roots of heaven in pleasure, there are
only roots of indifference and pain.
So what shall I do if I see that very clearly? Pleasure is such an
enticing thing! You understand? I look at the tree: it is a great
delight. To see a dark cloud full of rain and a rainbow, and this
seems a tremendous thing. That is a pleasure, that is a delight, that
is a tremendous enjoyment. Why can't I leave it there. You
understand? Why do I have to say, "I must store it up"? (I don't
know if you are following all this.) Then when I see the next day
the dark cloud, full of rain, and the leaves dancing in the wind, the

memory of yesterday spoils the sight of it. I have become dull. So
what shall I do? I cannot deny pleasure, but this does not mean I
indulge in pleasure. So I understand now that pleasure inevitably
breeds indifference I see it. I see it as a fact as I see the microphone
- not as an idea, not as a theory, not as a concept, but as an actual
fact. Right? So now I am watching the operation of pleasure. You
follow? The process of pleasure is what I am watching. As, "I like
you" and "I do not like someone else", which is again in the same
pattern. All my judgments are based on likes and dislikes. I like
you because you are respectable. I do not like you because you are
not respectable. You are a Muslim, or a Hindu, or you have sexual
perversions and I prefer the other perversions - and so on. You
follow? Like and dislike. So I watch it. And like and dislike is
again a habit, which I have cultivated through pleasure. The mind
now is watching the whole movement of pleasure, and you cannot
watch it if you condemn it. Are you following this? So what has
happened to my mind? Watch it, Sir. What has happened to my
mind? (Oh! you just throw out words. You don't know what you
are saying.) (That's right, Sir.) It has become much more sensitive.
Right? Therefore muchmore intelligent. Now that intelligence is
operating - not my intelligence or your intelligence, just
intelligence. I do not know if you are following this. Before, there
was indifference and I did not care. The mind did not care two pins
whether I lived like a pig or not. And I realized I must change. And
I see that to change to a greater pleasure is to come back to the
same filth. So the mind has realized something, seen something.
Not because somebody has spoken of it - but it has seen something
very clearly - that where there is the pursuit of pleasure, this must

inevitably breed indifference. So the mind has sharpened. And it is
watching pleasure in every movement. And you can only watch
anything freely, without reservation, condemnation, or judgment.
So the mind is watching. And it says "What is wrong with me, why
can't I look at a tree, why can't I see the beautiful face of a child or
a woman?" I can't shut my eyes - blindly go running away to the
Himalayas. It is there. Right? So what shall I do? Not look? Turn
my head when I pass a woman? (Which the Sannyasis do, they
know all the old tricks and all that.) So what shall I do? So I look.
You understand? I look. I look at that tree, the beauty of the
branch, the beauty of the curve of the tree. I look at a beautiful
face, well proportioned, the smile, the eyes. I look. Follow this.
When I look, there is no pleasure. Have you noticed it? Have you
got it? Have you understood what we are talking about? When I
look, where is there room for pleasure? I don't look with fear,
saying "My God! Am I caught in the trap of pleasure!" But I look,
whether it is at the tree, the rainbow, the fly, or a beautiful woman,
or the man. I look. In that look there is no pleasure. The pleasure
only arises when thought comes in.
Now without understanding this whole process - the saints, the
ugly, immature human beings called saints, the Rishis, the writers,
they have condemned this. Don't look, they say. And so - look.
And when you see very clearly there is neither pleasure nor
displeasure. It is there. The beauty of the face, the walk, the dress,
the beauty of the tree. A second later thought comes in and says,
"That was a beautiful woman". And all the imagery, sex,
intimations, thrills, begin. Are you following all this, Sirs, and
what are you going to do about it? What happens? Thought comes

in, and what is important now is not pleasure, because that is
understood, there is noth- ing to it. Look what has happened. The
mind has become extraordinarily sensitive, and therefore highly
disciplined, highly disciplined but not through an imposed
discipline. By watching that I am callous, indifferent - watching it,
and watching it - the mind has become sensitive. Watching is the
discipline. I wonder if you have got this! In this kind of discipline
there is no suppression; there is no suppression in the discipline
that is necessary in order to see. So the mind has become highly
sensitive, highly disciplined, and therefore austere - not the
austerity in regard to clothes and food, all that is too immature and
childish. And the mind now says it is watching pleasure and it sees
that the continuity of pleasure is created by thought. Right? So I
have entered into a totally different dimension. You understand? A
dimension in which I have to work very hard and which nobody is
going to tell me about. I can tell you, but you have to work for
yourself. So I say - "Why does thought come into this at all?" I
look at that tree, I look at a woman, I see that man going by in a
rich car, a nice car, driven by a chauffeur, and I say "All right". But
why does thought come in? Why? (Long pause) (Audience makes
a suggestion.) No Sir, no Sir. I haven't learnt the art of looking. Do
listen to this. I haven't learnt it. When I said "I see indifference,
callousness" I had not really seen it. Seeing it - not changing
callousness, but just to see it. So now, I am asking myself, "Why
does thought come into the picture at all?" Why can't I just look at
that tree, or that woman, or that car? Why? Why does thought
come into this?
Questioner: Memory comes as a barrier.

Krishnamurti: Ask yourself the question, Sir, and don't just say
"Memory comes as a barrier". You have just heard somebody else
say that. You heard me say that a dozen times, and you repeat and
throw back those words at me. They have no meaning to me any
more. I am asking quite a different question. I am asking why
thought comes into it at all. (Suggestion from audience.) Ask
yourself, Sir, and find out the answer. Why this constant
interference of thought? You understand Sir? It is very interesting
if you go into it for yourself. At present you cannot look at
anything without thought, without an image, without a symbol.
Why? (Long pause) Do you want me to answer it? The gentleman
sits very comfortably and says "Yes". "Please answer it, will you?"
And it's not going to make a pennyworth of difference to him.
(That's right, and it has become a habit. For the last fifty years,
doing whatever you have done.) If it is a habit, then what shall I
do? Do I see the habit as an idea or actually as habit - Do you see
the difference? If you do then you must find out.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VI CHAPTER 3 3RD PUBLIC DIALOGUE
MADRAS 9TH JANUARY 1968 'TIME, SPACE
AND THE CENTRE'
Krishnamurti: What shall we consider together this morning?
Questioner: What is psychological memory, and how is it
imprinted on the brain?
Questioner: Will you go into the subject of pleasure and
thought?
Questioner: What is the concept of life, and of this world?
Krishnamurti: Do you want to discuss that? "What is the
concept of life and of this world?" And also, what is the thinker,
and thought... What do you say, Sirs, I don't mind what we discuss.
Questioner: Fan we continue talking about thought? The last
talk ended with the problem of time and space.
Questioner: Could we talk a little more, explain more, about
time, space and the centre, which we were talking about the other
day?
Questioner: Why is it we want to discuss something from "the
other day"? That is over.
Krishnamurti: Perhaps if we discuss this question of a concept
of life, and living, we shall come upon the question of time, space
and the centre. I think that all the other questions will be included
in that. What is the concept of life? What do we mean by concept,
the word? To conceive, to imagine, to bring out. A conceptual
world is a world of ideas, formulas, a world of theories, a world of
imaginative ideological formation. That is what we mean, don't we,

when we talk about concepts? A conceptual world, an ideological
world. First of all, what is its place in our relations with others, in
the context of living? What is the relation between the conceptual
world, which we have more or less described or verbally explained,
what is the relationship between that, and actual daily living? Is
there any relationship at all? I have toothache; that is an obvious
fact. And the concept of not having toothache is an unreality. The
fact is, I have it. The other is a fictitious thing, an idea. Now what
relationship has the reality, the "what is", the actual daily living, to
the formula, the concept? Has it any relationship? You believe, at
least some of you, the Hindus, believe that there is the Atman. (We
are on a touchy subject.) That there is something permanent. That
is an idea, a theory, a concept, is it not? No? Shankara or the
Vedantas or some bird said that there is this Atman, or whatever it
is, the spiritual entity. That is just an idea, isn't it?
Questioner: Much more than that.
Krishnamurti: Much more?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: It is said that there is some permanent thing...
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: (I do not assume, Sir.) There is this theory, Sir,
the concept that there is a permanent state, a reality within each
one, God, or whatever you like to call it. The Christians, the
Muslims all say so, and different people use different words. Here
you use a series of words. Now, is that not a concept which has no
reality whatsoever?
Questioner: Now it is a concept, but in the course of time we
hope to discover that thing for ourselves.

Krishnamurti: When you postulate that there is a certain thing, a
something, then you will inevitably discover it! Psychologically,
the process is very simple. But why state anything at all?
Questioner: I am in love with the most beautiful woman in the
world, but I have never seen her. Although I have not seen her it is
a fact that she is beautiful.
Krishnamurti: Oh, come off it, Sir. It's not a bit like that. This
will lead to cuckoodom. We have ideologies, concepts - the ideal
of perfect man, the ideal of what should be, how the liberated
person should act, think, feel, live and so on. But these are all
concepts, aren't they?
Questioner: Surely what you call "what is" is also a concept!
Krishnamurti: Is it? When you have actual toothache, is that a
concept: when you are actually miserable because you have no job,
no food, is that a concept? When someone dies whom you love and
you are in great sorrow, is that a concept?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: What! A toothache is unreal? Where do you all
live? When death comes in old age, or through an accident you
break a leg, or whatever it is - is that theoretical, problematical? Is
it a concept? Sir, we are dealing now with concepts. A concept of
life. Why do you want concepts?
Questioner: To qualify life.
Krishnamurti: Why should I qualify life? I live, I suffer.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: That's just it. "How do you go about it, to
conceive life?" Why do you want to conceive life; about what
things should be like? What is the reality about life, you ask. The

reality of life is there, it is misery. There is pain, there is pleasure,
there is despair, there is agony.
Questioner: They are only apparent.
Krishnamurti: What do you mean, "only apparent"? Oh, you
mean it is an illusion! You mean that there is nothing like pleasure,
pain, war? That this is a lovely world? (Laughter). When they take
away your job you say there is no such thing, do you! When you
have no food, you say that that is an illusion, do you? No? Then
what are you talking about? You say it is not real? What do you
mean? You say a concept is a means to an end? Really this is a
most extraordinary world. What are we all talking about! We very
carefully analysed that word "concept", what it means. Right? The
gentleman says many people need the concept. Well keep it, Sir,
keep it.
Questioner: I did not say that. I said many people need to
understand the word "concept".
Krishnamurti: We explained it just now. So let us get on with it.
We asked what relationship the concept has with daily living.
Daily living is the daily grind of going to the office, the daily grind
of the torture of loneliness, misery and so on. What relationship
has that, which is the actual, which is what is, which is what is
going on every day in our lives, what has that to do with the
concept?
Questioner: Can I say something?
Krishnamurti: Delighted, Sir. You take the field.
Questioner: (Long speech. Inaudible.)
Krishnamurti: Ah! He says if we really understood the concept,
life would be different, and he quoted some other gentleman, I do

not know whom. Why should I understand concepts? When I am
full of misery, when I have no food, when my son has died, when I
am deaf, dumb, stupid - what has the concept got to do with all
that? Concept being the word, the idea, the theory. What has that to
do with my aching loneliness?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: What Sir, what Sir! I think we must get on with
it, otherwise we shall get nowhere. We are unwilling to face facts
and we spin around with a lot of words. Reality is not a concept;
reality is my daily life. Right? The reality is that I am in torture,
and pain is not a theory, is not a concept, it is an actual process in
life. So I say to myself - why do I have concepts about pain? It is
such a waste to have concepts about pain. So I do not want
concepts, I want to understand pain. Right?
The problem then is - what is pain? There is physical pain, such
as toothache, stomachache, headache, and disease, and also there is
pain at a different level, at the psychological level. Now, how am I
to be free of that? Free of inward pain. I can go to a doctor to be
cured of physical pain. But there is psychological pain in the sense
that I suffer. What do I suffer? What does one have pain about,
Sir?
Questioner: Loneliness and fear.
Krishnamurti: Right! Loneliness and fear. And I want to be free
of it, because this loneliness and fear are always a burden, they
darken my thinking, my outlook, my vision, my way of acting. So,
my problem is how to be free from fear, not from any theory; that
has gone overboard. I do not accept any theory about anything. So,
how do I get rid of fear? Will a concept help me to get rid of fear?

It is what you were saying earlier, Sir; but will having a concept
about fear help me to get rid of that fear? You say "Yes", you say
"it is a scientific thought", "it is a basis for reality", it is a "logical
conclusion". Do take a simple example, Sir, and work it out for
yourself. Don't introduce scientific, logical and biological facts.
There is fear; will a concept of no-fear help you get rid of fear? Sir,
don't theorize about it. You have a fear, haven't you? No? Don't
just throw words about. You have fear, don't you? Will a concept
help you to get rid of that fear? Do think it out, Sir; go into it. Don't
go back into some theory, Sir. Do please stick to one thing. There
is fear. You are afraid of your wife; you are afraid of death, afraid
you might lose your job. Will any theory, concept, help you to get
rid of those fears? You can escape from them. If you are afraid of
death you can escape from that fear by believing in reincarnation,
but fear is still there. You don't want to die, though you may
believe in all kinds of stuff, the fact is that fear is still there.
Concepts do not help to get rid of fear.
Questioner: They may gradually help us to be free.
Krishnamurti: Gradually? By that time you will be dead. Sirs,
don't theorize, for God's sake. These useless brains that theorize!
Questioner: Is it not escaping also to try and get rid of fear?
Krishnamurti: Oh, how childish we are! You can escape from your
wife, but your wife is still at home.
Questioner: You can change your way of life.
Krishnamurti: Sirs, do please let us be simple about this, you
know what fear is, don't you? You know what violence is, don't
you? Will a theory of non-violence help you to get rid of violence?
Take that one simple fact. You are violent; that is a reality. In your

daily life you are violent, and will that violence be understood
through a concept, the concept of non-violence? (Long pause.)
Questioner: (Inaudible long speech.)
Krishnamurti: What are you saying, Sir! We are speaking
English! Do you understand English, Sir? We are talking about
violence. Have you ever been violent, Sir?
Questioner: Sometimes.
Krishnamurti: Good. Now did you get rid of violence by a
concept?
Questioner: Seeing that one is violent one tells oneself to be
calm.
Krishnamurti: I wonder if we are talking the same language. I
give it up! You go on, Sir.
Questioner: (Continues inaudible statement.)
Krishnamurti: All right, Sir. You win.
Questioner: (Further inaudible speech.)
Krishnamurti: Thank God, Sir, you don't rule the world. You are
losing time. You are wasting time. You are living in a world which
is so unreal.
Questioner: (Continues to harangue. Inaudible.)
Krishnamurti: That is what we are saying, Sir. Face the fact
itself. And you can only face the fact if you have no theories about
the fact. Right? And apparently you gentlemen of the older
generation do not want to face the fact. You like to live in a world
of concepts. Please live there, Sirs. Now let us proceed. The
question is, is it possible for the mind to be free of fear? Now what
is fear? We feel afraid. (We are coming back to your question, Sir.)
(Not your question, Sir. You want to live in a world of theories;

live there. I am answering this other gentleman.) You ask who is
the entity or the being that says "I am afraid"? You have been
jealous, haven't you, envious? And who is the person who says "I
am envious"?
Questioner: The ego. There is a sense of the ego.
Krishnamurti: Now who is the ego? Sir, do analyse it. You
know what analysis is? Go into it, step by step. Who is it? Think it
out Sir, and don't quote Shankara, Buddha or X Y Z ! When you
say "I am afraid", who is the "I"?
Questioner: (Several inaudible suggestions.)
Krishnamurti: Don't quote. Do think it out, Sirs.
Questioner: Is it not thought that conceives of itself as being
permanent at the moment it is envious?
Krishnamurti: Now, what is that moment when that thought
regards itself as permanent? I am envious. I am conscious that I am
envious. Now who is that entity, that thought which says "I am
envious"?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Oh please, Sir! You do not analyse it; you just
make a statement! Do go into it, Sir. You say that at that moment,
when that thought makes the statement "I am jealous", that
thought, for the time being, thinks itself permanent. Right? Now,
why does that thought think it is permanent? Is it not that the
thought has recognised a similar feeling which it has had before?
Go slowly, step by step. I am envious. You know what envy is - I
become aware that I am envious, now I am asking - "Who is the
entity that has become aware? And how does that entity or that
thought know that it is `envy'?" That thought knows that it is envy

because it has felt envy. The memory of previous envy comes up
and the person who feels it says, "Here it is again." Right? Here is
the envy which I have had before. Otherwise you would think of it
quite differently. Because thought was able to recognise the
feeling, it was able to call it "envy". It had experienced the same
feeling before. So it says ("it" being thought)... (Interruption from
audience.) Sirs, I know it is very complex so we must go slowly
step by step. (Sirs, would you mind getting the coughing over - all
of you at once.) (Laughter) This is a very difficult question to go
into and u jess you give it your fall attention you cannot understand
its very intricate and subtle nature. We say - first of all there is
envy; one becomes conscious of that envy; then thought says, "I
have had that feeling before." Otherwise you would not be able to
recognise that feeling which you have called "envy". What one has
had as an experience before is given permanency, continuity
through recognition of what is taking place now. So, thought has
continuity because thought is the response of memory. Right? That
thought, which is the outcome of yesterday's memory says, "Here it
is again; it is envy". By calling it "envy" and recognising it, it has
given it greater vitality. Thought is the response of the bundle of
memories which constitute tradition, knowledge, experience and so
on, and that thought recognises the feeling which it has now,
"envy". So, thought is the centre, or the memory is the centre!
Right? (Pause) Sirs, your centre says "It is my house, I live there, it
belongs to me legally" and so on. You have certain memories,
pleasurable and painful memories. The whole bundle of them is the
centre, isn't it? The centre being violence, ignorance, ambition and
greed - it has pain, despair and so on. That centre creates space

around itself. Does it not? No? (Interruption). (Go slowly, Sirs...
An interval?... Ah, the gentleman wants me to repeat what I have
said. Sorry, Sir, I cannot repeat it, I cannot remember what I said.)
We will put it differently. There is this microphone. Round it
there is space. That is the centre, and it has space around it, and it
exists in space; as this room has space within it. But also this room
has space outside it. So the centre has a little space in itself, and
also it has space outside it. (I am not talking of creation. Just listen
quietly.) Please observe this, Sir, please go into it, please observe it
completely, not merely intellectually. It is more fun if you actually
go into it. But if you theorize about it then the discussion can go on
indefinitely and it leads nowhere. Here is the centre, and the centre
is a bundle of memories. (It is so fascinating, Sirs. Please go into
it.) The centre is a bundle of memories, a bundle of traditions, and
the centre has been brought about by tension, through pressure,
through influence. The centre is the result of time, within the field
of culture - Hindu culture, Muslim culture, and so on. So that is the
centre. Now that centre, because it is a centre, has space outside it,
obviously. And because of the movement, it has space in itself. If it
had no movement it would have no space. It would be nonexistent. Anything that is capable of movement must have space.
So there is space, outside the centre and in it. And the centre is
always seeking wider space, to move more widely. To put it
differently, the centre is consciousness. That is, the centre has the
borders which it recognises as "the me". As long as there is a
centre, it must have a circumference. Of course. And it tries to
extend the area of the circumference - by drugs, which is now
called the "psychedelic expansion of the mind" - through

meditation, through various forms of will, and so o-n. It tries to
extend the space it is aware of as consciousness, to make it grow
wider and wider and wider. But, as long as it is a centre its space
must always be limited. Right? So as long as there is a centre,
space must always be confined - like a prisoner living in a prison.
He has freedom to walk in the yard but he is always a prisoner. He
may get a larger yard, he may get a better building, more
comfortable rooms, with bathrooms and all the rest of it, but he is
still limited. As long as there is a centre, there must be the
limitation of space, and therefore the centre can never be free! It is
like a prisoner saying "I am free", within the prison walls. He is not
free. Many people may realize unconsciously that there is no such
thing as freedom within the field of consciousness, with a centre,
and therefore they ask whether it is possible to extend
consciousness, expand consciousness - by literature, by music, by
art, by drugs, by various processes. But as long as there is a centre,
the observer, the thinker, the watcher, whatever he does will be
within the prison walls. Right Sir? Please don't say "Yes". Because
there is distance between the border and the centre, time comes in,
because he wants to go beyond it, transcend it, push it farther
away. I don't know if you follow this? Sir, we are not dealing with
theories, but if you do this actually inside yourself you will see the
beauty of this thing. Questioner: Would you go into the tendency to
expand.
Krishnamurti: You know what it means, to expand. A rubber
band, you can stretch it, but if you stretch it beyond a certain point,
it breaks. (Yes Sir. It will break beyond a certain point). I feel,
living in Madras in a little house, that there is no space there. With

my family, with my worries, with my office, my traditions - it is
too deadly petty, and I want to break through it. There again is the
desire to expand. And when society presses me in, drives me into a
certain corner, I explode - which is again a revolt in order to
expand. And when one lives in a small flat in a very crowded street
and there is no open country to breathe in and no opportunity to go
there, I become violent. The animals do this. They have territorial
rights because they want space in which to hunt, and they prevent
anyone else coming into that area. Right, Sir? So, everything
demands expansion - trade, insects, animals and human beings,
they all must have space. Not only outwardly, but inwardly. And
the centre says, "I can expand by taking a drug." But you don't
have to take a drug to have an experience of this kind of expansion.
I don't have to take a drink to know what drunkenness is! I know
what drunkenness is, I see it! I don't have to take a drink!
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: No Sir, please Sir, don't bring in other things.
This is very complex Sir. If you go slowly into it, you will
understand it. The centre, being the prisoner of its own limitation,
wants expansion. It seeks expansion through identification - with
God, with an idea, with an ideal, with a formula, with a concept.
Please follow this, Sir! And it thinks it can live differently, at a
different level, though it is living in a miserable prison. So
concepts become extraordinarily important to a prisoner, because
he knows he cannot escape. And the centre being thought - we
examined that - then thought tries to expand by identification with
something - with the nation, with the family, with the group, with
culture - you know, expand, expand. But it is still living in prison!

As long as there is a centre there is no freedom: right? (Don't agree
Sir. For you all it is just a theory, and one theory is as good as
another.) So, see what it does! It invents time as a means of escape.
I will gradually escape from this prison. Right? I will practise, I
will meditate, I will do this and won't do that. Gradually,
tomorrow, tomorrow, next life, the future. It has not only created
space which is limited, but also it has created time! And it has
become a slave to a space and a time of its own. Ah! Do you see
this, Sirs?
Questioner: How does memory... (inaudible)
Krishnamurti: It is very simple, Sir. You asked that question
before. It is very simple if you look at it for yourself. Somebody
hits you, insults you, and you have a memory of that. I hit you, and
you are hurt, you are insulted, you are made little and you dislike
it, and that remains in your brain, in your consciousness, the
memory of me insulting you or flattering you. So the memory
remains and the next time you meet me you say to yourself, "That
man insulted me", "That man flattered me". The memory responds
when you meet me again. That's all, it's very simple. Don't waste
time on it.
Questioner: Where are we, after these discussions and talks?
Krishnamurti: I'm afraid I cannot tell you. If you understand
what is being said and live it then you will be in a totally different
world. But if you don't live it, daily, then you will just be living as
you are. That's all.
So first the problem is that as long as there is a centre, and we
know what we mean by "the centre", there must be time and
limited space. That is a fact, as you can observe it in your daily

life. You are bound to your house, to your family, to your wife, and
then to the community, to society, and then to your culture and so
on and so on. So this whole thing is the centre - the culture, the
family, the nation - that has created a boundary, which is
consciousness, which is always limited. And it tries to expand the
boundary, to widen the walls, but the whole is still within the
prison. So that is the first thing, that is what is taking place
actually, in our daily life. Then the question arises (please listen,
don't answer theoretically because that has no value), is it possible
not to have a centre and live in the world? That is the real problem.
Is it possible not to have a centre and yet live completely, fully, in
this world? What do you say?
Questioner: One could be just a point.
Krishnamurti: But a point is still a centre! No, Madame, don't
answer this question. If you just answer it means you have not
gone into it.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: That's it. I knew you'd say that, Sir; but you are
still within the circumference. You don't... You keep on... Sir, have
you ever been to prison? Not you, Sir, personally. Have you just
visited a prison? If you have visited a prison you will have seen
that they are expanding the walls. Bigger rooms, bigger prisons,
more and more. But you are still within a prison. And we are like
that. We live within the prison of our own thinking. With our
misery, our culture, saying "I'm a Brahmin, a non-Brahmin, I hate
this, I like this and I do not like that, I love this and not that", and
so on. We live within this prison, I may expand it a little bit but it's
still a prison. So this question arises (please don't answer, because

this is a very fundamental question, which you cannot possibly
answer glibly by a few words) you have to find out in life, in daily
living. So we are asking: "Is it possible to live in this world,
completely doing your job, doing everything with tremendous
vitality, without a centre, knowing what the centre is, and knowing
that to live in this world you need memory?" You see this, Sir?
You need memory to go to the office, to function there. If you are a
merchant you need a memory to cheat others or not, whatever you
do. You need memory, and yet to be free of the memory which
creates the centre. See the difficulty?.. So what will you do?
(Interjection.) Sir, please don't answer, you're back to theories.
When I've got a toothache, stomachache, or I'm hungry and I come
to your house, what do you give me? Theories? Or chase me out?
Here is a tremendous problem. It is not for India alone. It's a
problem round the world, a problem of every human being.
Now, is there a method to get rid of the centre? You follow? A
method? Is there? Method belongs to time, obviously, and
therefore a method is no good, whether it is the method of
Shankara, Buddha, your pet Guru, or no Guru, or you invent it.
Time has no value and yet, if you are not free from that centre you
are not free. Therefore you must always suffer. So a man who says,
"Is there an ending to sorrow?" must find the answer to this - not in
a book, not in some theory. One must find, see it. Right? So if there
is no method, no system, no leader, no guru, no saviour - all
introducing time - then, what will happen, what will you do? To
have come to this point, what has happened to your mind? What
has happened to your mind which has investigated this, very
carefully, not jumped to conclusions, nor theories, nor saying "It is

marvellous; but when it has done this, actually, step by step, has
come to this point, put this question, what has happened to such a
mind?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Oh no. Please Sir. What has happened to your
mind, if you have done this? No, no. It is something that has
happened to it. No you're only guessing, Sir. Don't guess. It's not a
guessing game. Your mind has become highly active, hasn't it?
Because to analyse so carefully, never missing, a point, logically,
step by step, you have to exercise your brain, you have to exercise
logic, you have to exercise discipline. So the mind has become
extraordinarily sensitive, hasn't it? The mind, by observing what it
is doing, what it has done, which is building up the centre, by
merely observing, the mind has become extraordinarily alert.
Right? You have done nothing to make it alert, but by merely
watching the movement of thought, step by step, it has become
extraordinarily clear. So, being clear, it puts the question, "How is
the centre to disappear?" When it has put that question it is already
seeing the whole structure of the centre. Seeing, actually visually,
as I see that tree, I also see this.
Questioner: What is the entity which sees the action?
Krishnamurti: Sir, I said the mind... You go back to something,
Sir, I'm awfully sorry but we can't go back. It is no good going
back to something which you have not actually lived as we went
along. You are inactive but think you have become active by
putting a question like, "Who is the entity that sees?" But you
haven't actually understood, observed, how the centre is formed through memory, through tradition, through the culture one lives

in, including religion and all the rest of it. The centre has been
formed through economic pressures, and so on. That centre creates
space, consciousness, and it tries to expand. That centre is saying
to itself (nobody else is asking it) "I realize I am living in a prison,
and obviously to be free from pain, sorrow, there must be no
centre." It sees this. The centre itself sees it - not somebody else
above or below telling the centre. So the centre says, seeing itself,
"Is it possible for me not to be?" (Long pause.) That means that we
have to go back to this question of seeing. Unless you understand
that, you can't come to it.
Questioner: (Inaudible suggestion.)
Krishnamurti: Ah, no, no, no. Seeing, without emotionalism,
sentimentality, like and dislike. Which does not mean that you see
something without feeling.
Questioner: (Inaudible interjection.)
Krishnamurti: That is what you all do, Sir. You see that dirt on
the road every day - and I have been here for the last twenty or
thirty years, and I see that squalor every day. Of course you see it
without feeling. If you felt, you would do something about it. If
you felt the rottenness of the corruption in this country you would
do something. But you don't. If you saw the inefficiency of the
Government, if you saw all the linguistic divisions which are
destroying this country, if you felt it, if you were passionate about
it, you would do something. You don't. Which means you don't see
it at all.
Questioner: (Inaudible interjection.)
Krishnamurti: Ah, no, no. "You see the bigger life" - what's the
"bigger life"? You see how you want to twist everything to

something else! You can't look at anything in a straight way,
simply, honestly. So, unless you do it, we can sit here and discuss
until Doomsday. What is seeing, is it this, is it that? But if you
really saw the tree, without space and time, and therefore without
the centre, then, when there is no centre and you look at the tree,
there is vast space, immeasurable space. But first, one must learn,
or watch, or hear how to look. But you won't do it. You won't
begin the very complex thing called life, very simply. Your
simplicity is to put on a loin cloth and travel third class and do socalled meditation, or whatever you do. But that is not simplicity.
Simplicity is to look at things as they are - to look. To look at the
tree, without the centre.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VI CHAPTER 4 4TH PUBLIC DIALOGUE
MADRAS 12TH JANUARY 1968 'A
FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION'
Krishnamurti: What shall we talk over this morning together?
Questioner: Is not love a method?
Questioner: Am I right in assuming, Sir, that time and spaceare
one of our problems?
Questioner: What is the relation between memory and thought?
Questioner: We must have memory in order to function in daily
existence, technological developments and so on, but is memory
not also an impediment?
Krishnamurti: I don't know if you have heard the previous
questions - I had better repeat them. First, has love a method?
Questioner: Is not love a method?
Krishnamurti: Is not love a method? - a lovely idea isn't it?
What was the other?
Questioner: The relation between thought and memory.
Krishnamurti: And your question, Madame, was - memory is
necessary in daily existence, in technological development and so
on, but is not memory also an impediment? Any more things that
you want to throw in?
Questioner: We want to be aware of every thought, feeling and
action, but thought, feeling and action go on being coloured and
then are suppressed when the mind is silent. How can that take
place?
Krishnamurti: Is that really what you are all interested in?

Questioner: We have disorder in our daily life - how are we to
go about bringing order?
Krishnamurti: We have disorder in daily life, how are we to set
about bringing order? Is that right, Sir?
Questioner: Or do we have to wait for a change to come of its
own accord?
Questioner: What is clear thinking?
Krishnamurti: All right. Let's take that up - shall we? And we
can answer your questions and bring them all in. Is that all right?
What is clear thinking? Shall we discuss that? And relate it, if
we can, to our daily living. What is clear thinking? Is thinking ever
clear? We had better not go too quickly. First of all, let's find out
what we mean by clarity, and what we mean by thinking. What do
we mean by clarity? Clear - when you look through the water on a
lake and see the bottom of that lake you see everything very
clearly, the pebbles, the fish, the ripples on the water and so on.
And you see very clearly, in bright light, the shape of the tree, the
leaf, the branch, the flower - what do we mean by clarity?
Questioner: A direct impression.
Krishnamurti: Oh! no. A definite outlined impression, is that it?
Questioner: Complete understanding.
Krishnamurti: Clarity means complete understanding. We
haven't come to that level yet. We are talking about what we mean
by that word "clear"?
Questioner: Free of any obstruction.
Questioner: To see things as they are, actually see things as they
are.
Questioner: To see without space. Questioner: Sir, sometimes

we don't get clarity if we look at the moon and a cloud at the same
time we see the moon moving and not the clouds.
Krishnamurti: Sir, we are talking about a word, the meaning of
that word, its semantics.
Questioner: More details.
Questioner: I think it has something to do with light, Sir, seeing.
Krishnamurti: Sir, would you mind just waiting a minute to
examine this before we say anything else. What do we mean by the
word "clear"? I see you clearly. I see the trees, the stars of an
evening, very clearly.
Questioner: Without obstruction.
Krishnamurti: Without obstruction. When the eye can see
everything very, very clearly. The seeing - that is what we mean,
when there is no obstruction, no barrier, no screen, no fog, and if
your eyes are short-sighted you put on glasses to see more clearly
into the distance and so on. Clarity - right - is that clear? I think we
are clear as to the meaning of that word.
Then what do we mean by thinking?
Questioner: Reasoning.
Krishnamurti: Thinking Sir, what does it mean?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Sir, look. The speaker is asking you a question.
What is thinking?
(Interruption from audience)
Krishnamurti: The speaker is asking you a question: what is
thinking?
(More interruptions)
Krishnamurti: The speaker is asking you: what is thinking? And

you don't even give space and time to find out what thinking is. A
question is being put to you, it is a challenge to you. And you
bubble over! You don't say, "Now how am I to find out what
thinking is? How does thinking take place? What is the origin or
the beginning of thinking?" It is a chal- lenge and you have to
respond to it. And to respond to it you have to (if you want to
respond to it adequately) you have to examine what thinking is,
how it happens. The speaker asks you - what is thinking? And what
does the mind do when it receives this challenge? Do you search?
Questioner: What we are doing now.
Krishnamurti: Do listen for a minute. You will have your
chance, Sir. Give the poor speaker a chance. When that question is
put to you what is the operation that your mind goes through?
Where do you find the answer to that question?
Questioner: Mind.
Krishnamurti: Sir, watch it, think it out, go into it. I ask you
where you live or what your name is - your response is immediate,
isn't it? Why is it immediate? Because you have repeated your
name umpteen times, thousands of times, and you know where you
live. So between the questioning and the answer, there is no time
interval - right? It is immediate. I ask you what is the distance
between Madras and Delhi or New York, and there is a hesitation right? So you look into memory, into what you have learnt or what
you have read and you say, "Well the distance is so many miles".
So you have taken time between the question and the answer, there
is a lag of time - right, Sirs?
Now what happens when there is the question, "What is
thinking?" How do you find that out?

Questioner: It takes one's mind to bring all the answers.
Krishnamurti: What do you do, Sir?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: You probe into the memory and what do you get
out of it? What is the answer?
Questioner: We study it a little more and more and then try to
gather these extracts together.
Krishnamurti: Sir look, I am asking you now, this morning,
don't wait until the day after tomorrow until you and I have gone,
or are dead, but I am asking you now - what is thinking? And you either you find out or you don't know - right? Which is it?
Questioner: It is the process of a mind giving an answer.
Krishnamurti: What do you mean by the process of the mind?
Questioner: Sir, what are you aiming at? - I don't understand.
Krishnamurti: What am I aiming at? Just a minute Sir, you have
asked a question. What am I aiming at? What I am aiming at is
very simple. I want to know, when that question is put, "What is
thinking?", I want to find out what it is. (Interruptions from
audience.) Sir, give the other fellow a chance, don't answer so
readily. I want to find out what thinking is - how does it come
about, what is the beginning of it? Right? It is very simple, Sir.
Now what is it, how does it come about? That is, you asked me a
question - say, "What is thinking?" - and I really don't know right? Or I do know, I know the whole process of it - how it
operates, how it begins, what is its mechanism - right? No?
Questioner: One feels how it operates but I am unable to
explain.
Krishnamurti: One feels how it operates but one is not capable

of explanation. Look, take a very simple thing, Sir. I ask you what
your name is. You hear the words and then what happens?
Questioner: You really just answer.
( Various comments - inaudible.)
Krishnamurti: You reply, don't you? Say your name is so and
so. What has taken place there?
Questioner: I have referred to my memory and my memory
responds.
Krishnamurti: That's right, Sir, that's all. The question - to that
question your memory responds and replies - right? Now I ask you
- what is thinking? - and why doesn't your memory respond?
Questioner: Because... (inaudible).
Krishnamurti: It may be, Sir, go into it, find out - why don't you
reply what thinking is? Whether you know or you don't know. If
you know, you will say, if you don't know you will say, "Sorry I
don't know". Which is it?
Questioner: I don't know.
Krishnamurti: The gentleman doesn't know. We are trying to
answer the question, "What is clear thinking?" We more or less
understood the meaning of the words clarity, clearness, clear. And
we are finding it rather difficult to find out what thinking is. We
say it is the response of memory to a challenge - right? And that
response comes from accumulated memories, knowledge,
experience. This is simple, Sir. You learn a language after having
heard it from childhood, you can repeat it because you have stored
up the words, the meaning of that word, the word in relation to the
thing and so on, and you can speak because you have stored up the
vocabulary, words, the structure and so on. Memory responds and

the response of memory is thinking. Now what is the origin of
thinking, the beginning of thinking? We know that after
accumulating memory we respond and the response is thought.
Now I want to find out also - that is, in order to find out what clear
thinking is - I want to find out what is the beginning of memory?
Or is that too difficult, too abstract?
Questioner: It is our conditioning.
Krishnamurti: No, I am afraid I am going too fast. Sorry. All
right, Sirs. I won't go into it. What is thinking - we know now! So
when you respond, when thought is the response of memory and
memory is the past (the accumulated experience, knowledge,
tradition, and so on) that response is what we call thinking,
whether it be logical, illogical, balanced, unbalanced, sane, healthy,
it is still thinking. Now, please follow the next thing, can thought
be clear?
Questioner: No, it is always conditioned.
Krishnamurti: No, do please find out. Can thought be clear?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: You see you are just supposing. You live on
abstraction and that is why you cannot be practical. You live on
concepts, ideas and theories and when you move out of that field
you are completely lost: when you have to answer something
directly, of yourself, you muddle along. We asked, "Can thinking,
which is the outcome of memory (memory is always the past, there
is no living memory) can thinking, which is of the past, ever be
clear?" This is a very interesting question, Sirs. Can the past
produce clear action? Because action is thought - right?
Questioner: Yes, that is a fact.

Krishnamurti: Sirs, have we understood the question? We have
more or less analysed the word "clear", and we have more or less
analysed what thinking is. So the next thing we are asking is, can
thinking (which is the outcome of a long past, which is not living,
and is therefore always old) can that thing which is old, the past,
ever be clear? You understand, Sir? If I do anything out of
tradition, (which is the past, however noble, ignoble, or stupid) - if
I do anything out of tradition, can that action be clear?
Questioner: It cannot because memory and tradition belong to
the past...
Krishnamurti: I am asking, Sir, can action born out of the past,
the doing, which is always in the present, the doing, not "having
done" or "I will do", but the actual doing - can it ever be clear?
Questioner: The word action and the word clear have nothing to
do with each other. "Clear" applies to seeing everything...
Krishnamurti: All right. Can that action be fresh, new, direct, as
direct as when you meet fire and you move away. So I am asking,
"When we live and function in the shadow of the past, is there any
clarity?" Leave action out because that disturbs you - I know why it
disturbs you - because you are never used to acting, you are used to
conceptual thinking. And when you are faced with action, you get
confused, because your life is confused, and that's your affair.
So, when you act from the past, from tradition, is it action, is it
something living?
Questioner: Why should there be any difference between clarity
and action? Krishnamurti: Oh! we can discuss this ad nauseam. But
I am just asking, Sir. You are all tradition-ridden, aren't you? traditionalists. You say this or that is sacred, or repeat some shloka,

or, if you don't do any of that, you have your own tradition, your
own experience, which you go on repeating. Now does this
repetition bring understanding, clarity, freshness, newness?
Questioner: It is an aid to understanding the present situation.
Krishnamurti: Is the past an aid to understanding the present?
Questioner: Things break down.
Krishnamurti: Wait Sir, wait Sir. Look at it. Does the past help
you to understand the present?
Questioner: The past is...
Krishnamurti: Just listen, Sir, what she has said. You have had
thousands and thousands of wars, does it help you to prevent all
wars? You have had class division - Brahmin and non-Brahmin
and all the hate involved - does the past help you now to be free of
all caste?
Questioner: It should.
Krishnamurti: It should - then we are lost! When you say, "It
should" it is an idea, it is not an action. You will still be a Brahmin,
you will still be superstitious, you will still be violent.
Questioner: People don't want to be free of the past.
Krishnamurti: It doesn't matter if you are free or not - don't be
free of it, live in your misery. But if you want to understand this
thing called clear thinking and going beyond it, you have to face
certain things. If you say "Well, I don't want to change my
traditions"...
Questioner: Can you not help us to at least make a... ?
Krishnamurti: We are doing that, Sir, we are doing that. Look
Sir, if the past is a help, if tradition is a help, if culture is a help, to
live now, fully, clearly, happily, sanely and flower in goodness, the

past then has a value - but has it? Do you, with all your tradition,
live happily? Questioner: The past is like looking through smoked
glass.
Krishnamurti: That's right. So the past doesn't really help you.
Questioner: A little bit.
Krishnamurti: Don't say "No", because you are only speaking of
another idea; unless you do it, cut yourself from the past, you can't
say "Yes, it is no good".
Questioner: We have the chance to understand you because we
have listened to you for years. A child has no such chance.
Krishnamurti: "We have the chance to understand you because
we have listened to you for forty years - a child hasn't - and all the
rest of it!" Why do you bother to listen to the speaker at all? Even
for a day or, worse, for forty years? How tragic it all is! I don't
know where you people live.
And so let's get back. When I am always looking over my
shoulder to the past, I can never see anything clearly in the present,
obviously. I need two eyes to look, but if I am looking over my
shoulder all the time, I can't see the present. What I need to do is to
look at the present, and I am not capable of looking at the present
because I am burdened with the past, with my tradition. Tradition
says to me "It is terrible to have a divorced wife; or my
respectability says to me "That person is terrible because he is not
moral", (whatever that may mean). We all do this. So what happens
to my affection, to my kindliness towards that person? My
prejudice, which is tradition, prevents me from being kind or
affectionate to that person.
The past may help in the field of technology, but it does not

help in the field of life. I know this is theory now and you will
repeat that ad nauseam and think you have understood it. So the
question arises: as thought is of the past and I have to live
completely in the present to understand the present, how is the past
to be put aside and yet be useful? That is what your question was.
You understood my question? I have to live, to live in this world,
and I need technological knowledge to go to the office - you know
all that is involved in it, science, bureaucracy; this is the case if you
are a professor or even if you are a labourer. And I see also - I have
understood something this morning - that to live completely, fully,
the past must not interfere; so I say to myself, "How is this
possible? How is it possible for me to live in the technological
world most efficiently, logically, with more and more technology,
and yet live at another level, or even at the same level, without the
interference of the past?" In the technological field I must have the
past, in the other field of life - no past. Do we see this?
Questioner: Yes, now we have an understanding.
Krishnamurti: Ah, good! And I ask myself (don't laugh, Sir) now I ask myself how this is possible.
Questioner: Is a double life possible?
Krishnamurti: No, you see, what you are leading is a "double
life". You go to the temple, put on ashes; you know the set-up,
ringing of bells and all the jingles. And at the same time you live at
the technological level. You are leading a double life, and you say,
"Is it possible?" Of course it is possible because you are leading it.
We are not talking about a double life. Examine the complexity of
this problem, that one has to have technological knowledge and
that there must also be freedom from knowledge, from the past.

Now, how is this possible? The double life which you are leading
now is in existence, and therefore you are making a hideous mess
of life, you go to the temple and at the same time run a machine.
You put on ashes, or whatever you do, and go to the office. It is a
form of insanity. Now, how is this possible? Have you understood
my question, Sirs? You tell me how it is possible. Do you say it is
not a double life?
Questioner: To use the technological knowledge only when it is
necessary and not in other ways.
Krishnamurti: But you have to use such knowledge all the time
- to go to your office, to go to your home, to follow the road, when
you look at a tree, when you do the bureaucratic job, and so on;
this mental operation is functioning all the time. People don't see
this. You can't divide it, can you? Go slow, go slow. You can't
divide life into technological life and non-technological life. That
is what you have done and therefore you are leading a double life.
So we are asking,"Is it possible to live so completely that the part is
included in the whole?" Right? Are you getting it? Now we lead a
double life, the part, we keep it separate, going to the office,
learning a technology, all that, and going to church or the temple
and ringing bells. So you have divided life and therefore there is
conflict in your life between the two. And we are asking for quite a
different thing, to live so that there is no division at all. I don't
know if you see this?
Questioner: You want us to...
Krishnamurti: No, no, I don't want you to do anything.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Oh no, Sir. You are not meeting the question -

please understand what the speaker is trying to convey. Don't go
back to something he has said about psychological memory and all
the rest of it. That is a set of words you have learnt. Find out what
the speaker is trying to explain now. Can I live a life in which there
is no division at all (sex, God, technology, getting angry) - you
follow? A life in which there is no division, no fragments?
Questioner: The moment there is an end to these things...
Krishnamurti: Sir - please Sir, don't just throw out words. Now
to continue: How am I, who live in fragments, many fragments not
just two (my whole life as I live it is a fragmentary existence,
which is a result of the past, which is the result of my saying, "This
is right, that is wrong", "This is sacred, that is not sacred" or
"Technology and all that doesn't really matter, one has to earn, but
going to some temple is endlessly important") - how can I live
without fragmentation? You understand the question, Sir, now?
How? (Not "according to what method", because the moment
you have introduced method you have introduced fragmentation).
"How am I to do it?" is the question, but you say immediately,
"Tell me the method" and "the method" means: a method which
you practise as opposed to something else and therefore the whole
thing is back where we started. So there is no method. But the
question of "How" is merely asking, finding out, not searching for
a method. Now, how is it possible so to live that there is no
fragmentation at all? You understand my question, Sir? That means
no fragmentation at all at any level of my being, of my existence.
Questioner: What is being, Sir?
Krishnamurti: What is being? - I am sorry we are not discussing
that, Sir. You see you are not even paying attention. You pick up a

word like "being" or a phrase like "what is the purpose of life", and
off you go. But that is not what we are talking about. Look, Sir,
how am I to live so that there is no fragmentation at all? I don't say,
"Well, I'll go and meditate" - which becomes another
fragmentation, or "I must not be angry", "I must be this or that;
these sentences all involve fragmentation. Can I live without any
fragments, without being torn apart? Right, Sir? Have you
understood the question?
Now who is going to answer you? Will you go back to
memory? What the Gita said, what the Upanishads said, what
Freud said, or somebody else said? If you went back and tried to
find out what they said about living without fragmentation, then
that would be another fragment, wouldn't it?
Questioner: What of those who don't seek their aid?
Krishnamurti: If you do not seek their aid, then where are you?
How do you find this out? How do you find out how to live so that
there is no fragmentation at all? Oh, Sirs, you don't see the beauty
of this.
Questioner: By integration.
Krishnamurti: I knew you'd give that answer. (Laughter) The
questioner says, "By integration" - integrating with what?
Integrating all the fragments together? Or putting all the pieces
together? And who is the entity that is putting all the pieces
together? Is it the Higher Atman or the Cosmos or God or the Soul
or Jesus Christ or Krishna? All that is fragmentation - you follow?
So you have this challenge, and how do you respond to it, that is of
the first importance - you understand? You are challenged, how do
you respond to it?

Questioner: You work it out in life so that you become
harmonious. Krishnamurti: Ah, lovely! When? (Laughter).
Questioner: Every day.
Krishnamurti: There is no day, every day.
Questioner: Every morning.
Krishnamurti: Now, look what you are doing. You are just
adjusting yourself to the challenge. You are not answering it.
(Laughter) How do you answer this, Sir?
Questioner: It is not a question of answering at all because we
are trying to meet you with the word.
Krishnamurti: Find out, Sir, what you are doing. Find out. Here
is a challenge and you can't go back to any books - right? You can't
go back to your authority, the Gita and all that rubbish. So what
will you do? You see I can go on explaining, Sir, but you will just
accept it, as you have accepted so many things, and carry on. So
let's look at it.
Here is a new challenge. The challenge being that I have lived
in fragments all my life (the past, the present and the future, God
and the devil, evil and good, happiness and unhappiness, ambition
and no ambition, violence and non-violence, hate, love and
jealousy) these are all fragments; all my life I have lived that way.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: We have been through all that, Sir. Give the
speakers two minutes, will you kindly?
Now, what is the answer? I have lived a fragmentary,
destructive, broken life and now I have to live - now the challenge
put to me has been: "Can I live without any fragmentation?" That
is my challenge. Now how do I respond to it? I respond to it by

saying, "I really don't know" - right? I really don't know. I don't
pretend to know. I don't pretend tO say "Yes, here is the answer".
When a challenge is put to you, a new challenge, the instinctive
response - I do not mean instinctive - the right response is humility:
"I don't know." Right? But you don't say that. Can you honestly say
you don't know? You can, good. Then what do you mean by that
feeling, "I don't know"? Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Don't answer it too quickly, find out. Use your
brain cells.
Questioner: The recognition of fact, Sir.
Krishnamurti: I have recognised the fact, otherwise I wouldn't
even answer it.
Questioner: I have no means of finding out. I do not know and I
don't know the means of finding out.
Krishnamurti: Now wait. I don't know - right? Now what is the
state of the mind - please follow it, listen quietly - what is the state
of the mind that says "I really don't know"?
Questioner: Lack of... ?
Krishnamurti: Oh, there we are! You people are so dull.
Questioner: I do not know.
( Various comments - inaudible.)
Krishnamurti: Oh, you are so immature, like children in a class!
This is a very serious question we are asking and you just throw in
a lot of words, you haven't even the humility to listen and find out
for yourselves.
Questioner: It is not easy, I don't know.
Krishnamurti: When we say, when you say, as that gentleman
said just now, he doesn't know, what is the state of mind that has

replied "I don't know"?
Questioner: Waiting.
Krishnamurti: You are - Sir, how old are you?
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: Oh, Sir. When I say "I don't know", I really don't
know. But am I waiting to find out, or waiting for somebody to tell
me - right? I am waiting. Therefore when I say "I don't know", it
isn't an actual fact that I don't know, because I hope that somebody
is going to tell me, or that I'll find out. Do you follow this? Right.
Then you are waiting, aren't you? Why are you waiting? Who is
going to tell you? Your memory? If your memory is going to tell
you, you are back again in the same old rut. So what are you
waiting for? So you say "I won't wait" - you follow, Sir? - there is
no waiting. There is no "in the meantime" - you follow this? I
wonder if you do. So when you say "I don't know", it means
nobody knows - right? Because if anybody tells me, he will tell me
out of fragmentation - no? So I don't know, therefore there is no
waiting, there is no answer - right? So I don't know. Then I find out
what is the state of the mind that says "I don't know" - are you
following it? It is not waiting, not expecting an answer, not looking
to some memory, authority, it ceases - all that has stopped. Right?
So the mind - follow it step by step - so the mind is silent in the
face of a new challenge. It is silent because it can't answer the new
challenge. I don't know if you are meeting this; right, Sirs? (No.
No. You don't understand?)
You know when you see a marvellous mountain, the beauty, the
height of it, the dignity, the purity of it, it forces you to be silent,
doesn't it? - this may last a second but the very grandeur of it

makes you silent. And a second later all the reactions begin. Now if
you see the challenge in the same way - but you don't because your
mind is chattering - so you don't see the importance or the
magnitude of this question, which is: can I live (living meaning
now, not tomorrow or yesterday, or a second after, or a second
before) can I live without fragmentation? It is an immense question
- right? Why aren't you silent?
Questioner: Because I want to live without fragmentation.
Krishnamurti: Ah - which means what?
Questioner: I want to be out of it.
Krishnamurti: Which means what? Go into it. You don't see the
immensity of the question. All that you want to do is to get into
another state, therefore you don't see the magnitude of the question.
Why don't you? Pursue it. You do see it, when you see a
marvellous mountain, sparkling with snow in the clear blue sky
with great, deep shadows, and absolute silence. Why don't you see
this in the same way? Because you want to live in the old way.
You are not concerned with seeing the full meaning of that
question, but you say, "For God's sake tell me quickly how to get
there".
Questioner: I am already seeking the solution of how to get
there.
Krishnamurti: That's right. So you are more concerned with the
solution than with the question. Which means what?
Questioner: I won't get it.
Krishnamurti: No. Which means what? Look at it, look at it,
don't answer it yet - which means what?
Questioner: (Inaudible)

Krishnamurti: No, Madame, stick to it.
Questioner: (Inaudible)
Krishnamurti: You have understood the question? You don't see
the magnitude of this question because you want to reach it, get it,
you are greedy. So your greed is preventing you from seeing the
immensity of it. So what is important? (Follow it step by step.) Not
the immensity but your greed. Why are you greedy - about
something which you don't understand at all? (You don't mind, Sir,
my pursuing what your daughter says like that?)
Questioner: Satisfaction!
Krishnamurti: Now, see why. Why are you greedy, when you
haven't even understood what is involved in it? So you say, "How
stupid of me to be greedy about something when I don't know what
it means" - right? So what I have to do is not, not to be greedy, but
to find out the implications, the beauty, the truth, the loveliness of
that thing. Why don't you do that, instead of saying "I must get it"?
So you respond to a new question, a new challenge, invariably
from the old. Greed is from the old. Therefore is it possible to cut
off the past entirely? You understand? It is the past that is
fragmentary, that is bringing about fragmentation, breaking up life.
So my question is: is it possible to be free of the past totally so that
I can live technologically? I don't know if you follow this? Can I
be free from the past, can I be free from being a Hindu, Buddhist,
Muslim, Christian, or anything else? Not "can I be; I must be. It is
stupid for me to belong to any caste, to any religion, to any group.
Out it goes. There is no time to think about it as you suggested. Out
it has gone - you follow? So it is possible to cut the past
completely; if you can do it in one direction you can do it totally.

Right? (Oh, no, you don't see.)
So, can you, from this moment, be free completely of your
nationality, of your tradition, of your culture, of your past? If you
can't, you live in fragmentation, and therefore everlastingly life
becomes a battlefield. And nobody is going to help you in this. No
guru, no Communist, nobody is going to help you do it. And in
your heart of hearts you know this jolly well. Well, Sirs? So
thought is always old - right? Discover this for yourselves, don't
repeat after me - discover it. And you see what an extraordinary
thing you have discovered. So if you discover this - that thought is
really old - then all the past - the Shankaras, the Buddhas, the
Christ, the whole past is gone. No? But you don't discover it. You
won't make the effort to discover it; you don't want to discover it.
Questioner: No Sir, there is the fear of being lost.
Krishnamurti: Well, be lost, you are lost anyhow!
Questioner: Not completely lost.
Krishnamurti: But you are lost, Sirs. What are you talking
about? You are terribly lost. It is only a lost man that is
everlastingly in conflict. You are lost, but you don't recognise that
you are lost. So thought is always old; then, what is it - that is too
difficult to go into now - I'll just put it forward and you will see for
yourselves - what is it then that sees something new? You
understand, Sirs? Thought is always old - follow it carefully - when
the Adi Shankara, that old bird, said something, his thought was
already old - do you understand? Therefore what he said was never
new, he repeated in his own coinage of words something which he
had heard, and you repeat it after him. So thought is never new and
can never be new, and living now, every day, is something which

is the active present; it is always active, in the present. Therefore
when you try to understand activity in the present, with the past,
which is thought, then you don't understand it at all; then there is
fragmentation, and life becomes a conflict. So can you live so
completely that there is only the active present now? And you
cannot live that way if you haven't understood and thereby cut
yourself off completely from the past, because you yourself are the
past. You see you will unfortunately go on just listening - if I
happen to come next year you will repeat the same old stuff.
Questioner: Sir, if we are not in the past, but in the present, does
that not also become the past and the future - how are we to know
that we are right?
Krishnamurti: You don't have to be sure you are right - be
wrong! Why are you frightened about being right or wrong? But
your question has no validity at all because you are just talking,
you are just theorizing. You are saying, "If this happens, that would
happen". But if you put it into action then you would know there is
no such thing as "going wrong".
Questioner: Sir, when we go back home we see our children and
the past comes in.
Questioner: Shankara may go.
Krishnamurti: I hope it has gone. Shankara may go but the
children remain. (Laughter) Are the children the past? They are in
one sense. And as they are living human beings, can you educate
them to live completely, in the way we are talking about?
Questioner: Right Sir, you have answered it, sorry.
Krishnamurti: That means I have to help them to be intelligent,
I have to help them to be sensitive, because sensitivity, highest

sensitivity is the highest intelligence. Therefore if there are no
schools around you, you have to help them at home to be sensitive,
to look at the trees, to look at the flowers, to listen to the birds, to
plant a tree if you have a little yard - or if you have no yard to have
a tree in a pot and to look at it, to cherish it, to water it, not to tear
its leaves. And as the schools do not want them to be sensitive,
educated, intelligent (schools only exist to pass exams and get a
job) you have to help them at home, to help them to discuss with
you, why you go to a temple, why you do this ceremony, why you
read the Bible, the Gita - you follow? - so that they are questioning
you all the time, so that neither you nor anyone else becomes an
authority. But I am afraid you won't do any of this because the
climate, the food, the tradition is too much for you, so you slip
back and lead a monstrously ugly life. But I think, if you have the
energy, the drive, the passion, that is the only way to live.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VII CHAPTER 1 1ST PUBLIC TALK SAANEN
18TH JULY 1971 'WHAT IS YOUR OVERRIDING INTEREST?'
WHAT IS YOUR primary interest, your deep, abiding intention? I
think one should discover that for oneself. You must find that out
and relate it to all the activities of daily life.
One may be deeply concerned with the world as it is, with the
violence, the appalling chaos, the political divisions, and the
corruption - which is death, not only outwardly but also inwardly.
In discovering one's deep interest for oneself, one will be able to
find out one's relationship with another, according to that interest.
If that interest is vague, superficial, depending on surroundings and
the wind that blows in any direction, then our activities, both
outwardly and inwardly, will be rather casual, without any
significance. During these talks and discussions, could you find out
what is your major interest, whether you are really concerned with
the world and your place in the world, with your relationship to
another human being, your relationships politically, economically,
socially and religiously? What is your deep, major interest in life?
Is it acquiring money, prestige, security? Please listen to this
carefully. If that is your real, vital, sustained interest, then you
must see the consequences of such an interest. Or is your interest,
considering the world and your relationship with it, not only to
change yourself but also to change the world about you? Then you
must also see the implications of this. Or is it that you want to
establish a personal relationship with another so completely, so

wholly, that there is no conflict: then also you must realize the
consequences of this. Perhaps your interest is something more
difficult: trying to find out what is the place of thought, as the
measurable and the immeasurable. To discover in which direction
our interest lies, we must be willing to dedicate ourselves
completely to it, and not just play with it, casually accepting or
rejecting it according to circumstances, according to environmental
influences and our own likes and dislikes. If we are prepared to go
into this completely, then we can establish a relationship between
ourselves - ? relationship with the world, with our neighbour and
with our intimate friend.
That is what we intend to do during these weeks, to find out
where our major capacity and interest lies, and whether that
interest is isolated, or is related to all human beings. If it is isolated
and you are seeking your own particular enjoyment, your own
particular salvation, your own particular safety, a good position in
the world, then in talking this over together, we shall be able to
find out whether such an interest has any validity, whether it has
any significance at all. But your interest, your deep purpose may be
to find out how to live a totally different life. Seeing things as they
are, the violence, the brutality, the enmity and hatred, the
corruption and the utter chaos, your aim may be to find out
whether the human mind, your mind, the mind of each one of us, is
capable of completely changing, so that, as a human being, you not
only bring about a radical revolution in yourself but also outwardly
- although the outward revolution and the inward revolution are not
separate.
We are not talking of physical revolution: violence, bombs,

killing people in the name of peace. That is no revolution at all; it
is merely childish destruction.
I do not know if you have observed the violence all over the
world. The younger generation were at first giving flowers to
everybody, living in a world of "beauty" and imagination; when
that did not work, they took to drugs, they became violent, and we
are now living in a world of complete violence. You can see this in
India, in the Middle East, in America.
As we grow older our capacities are dulled, the world is too
much for us. Therefore, it behoves each one of us to find out our
purpose, our intention, our major interest. Once we have
discovered this we can discuss it, then we can take a journey
together, providing that your interest and the speaker's are the
same, because the speaker knows exactly his intention, his drive,
his interest, and if your interest is something quite different, then
our relationship becomes difficult. If, however, your interest is to
understand this world in which we live as human beings - not as
technicians - then we can establish a relationship and together we
can talk things over - together we can take a journey. Otherwise
these talks and discussions will have very little meaning.
Please bear this in mind, although you are here for a holiday
amongst the mountains, the hills and the streams, and the tourist
entertainments, in spite of all that, we have an opportunity of
sitting together for a whole hour. You know, that is quite
interesting, to sit together for an hour and talk over our problems
without any pretence, without any hypocrisy, and without
assuming some ridiculous facade. To have a whole hour together is
really extraordinary, because so rarely do we sit and discuss

serious matters with anybody for a whole hour. You may go to the
office for a whole day, but it has far greater meaning to spend sixty
minutes or more together in order to investigate, to seriously
examine our human problems hesitantly, tentatively and with great
affection, without trying to impose one opinion upon another;
because we are not dealing with opinions, ideas, or theories.
We are concerned with establishing a relationship between one
another, and that can only be done if we know our mutual interests,
and how deep those interests lie, and what energy we have to
resolve the major problems of our life. Our life is not different
from the rest of the world: we are the world. I don't think any of us
realize, deeply and continuously, that we are the world and the
world is us. This must be deeply rooted within us. We have made
this social structure, this violence, according to our desires,
according to our ambition, greed and envy, and if we would change
society we must first change ourselves; that seems such a simple,
radical approach to the whole problem. But we think that by
changing the outer structure of society, by throwing bombs,
making political divisions and the like, we shall by some miracle
all become perfect human beings; I am afraid that never works.
And to realize that we are the world, not as a verbal statement or a
theory, but to actually feel it in our hearts, is very difficult, because
our education, our culture, has laid emphasis on our being separate
from the world; that as individuals we have a responsibility to
ourselves and not to the rest of the world, that as individuals we are
free to do as we like, within reason. But we are not individuals at
all; we are the result of the culture in which we live. An individual
means an entity who is not fragmented, who is whole; we are not

that. We are broken up, fragmented, in a state of contradiction
within ourselves, therefore we are not individuals. So, seeing all
this, what is our major interest in life?
You must give yourself time to think it over. Let us sit together
quietly and find out. Is it that you have so many problems,
economic, social, the problem of personal relationship and you
would like to solve them all wholly and completely? Is it that you
have sexual problems which you have not been able to solve, so
the solving of that becomes your major interest? Is it that you want
to live peacefully in a world that is noisy, corrupt and violent? Or
does your interest lie in the direction of social reform and to that
you are dedicated? And if you are, then what is your relationship to
that society? Or are you interested in finding out the limitations of
thought? Thought is limited, however logical, however capable it
may be; thought is also inventive and experimental, producing
marvellous things technologically, but it is still limited. Do you
want to find out if there is something more, something beyond
thought-the measurable and the immeasurable? You have to look at
all these problems.
Questioner: I don't understand what you mean when you say, "
We are the world" and " The world is us".
Krishnamurti: Is that your major problem? Don't bother about
what I say. What is your problem, what is your major interest, and
have you the energy, the capacity, the intensity, to solve that
problem? It is really very important for you to find out. Don't
concern yourself with what the speaker says; that is irrelevant. But
find out for yourself what your interest is and see how much
energy, passion and vitality you are prepared to give pursuing that

interest; because if you have no passion, no intensity to pursue that
interest then - if I may point out - corruption has set in and where
there is corruption, there is death. Then from which end shall we
begin? Can this total movement of living, this whole human
existence be split up in this way? Don't agree or disagree, just
listen. Do you first of all establish a physical relationship of order,
giving social and economic security, and after laying the
foundations, build a complete house and then move from there to
the other, or is it one total unitary movement, indivisible, nonfragmented, wherever you begin, because the two are related, the
two are inseparable.
We want complete physical order, and we must have order in
our life inwardly as well as outwardly. We must have order, not
military order, not the order of the older generation nor the order of
the younger generation - the permissive society is disorder, it is
corruption and decay; and the so-called order of the older people is
really disorder, with its wars, its violence, its division and snobbery
- it is also corruption. So, seeing both the permissive disorder of
the young and the "ordered" disorder of the old, observing both,
one realizes that there must be a different kind of order. And that
order must assure physical security for everybody, not just for a
few rich people, or for those who are well placed and have
capacity. There must be physical security for everybody.
As you know, over six million people from the East have
crossed the border into India. Do you realize what that means, not
only for the refugees but also for the country that itself is already
impoverished? How can you establish order there? And the young
people have created total disorder with the so-called permissive

society. They say the older generation have created disorder and
they want to have nothing to do with it; they want a different way
of living, so they do just as they like. But that too is disorder; both
are disorder. I wish you could see this!
One realizes that there must be physical order, physical security,
for every human being in the world. This has always been the
dream of the revolutionaries, of the idealists and the philosophers;
they believed that through physical revolution they could achieve
their ambition. But it has never succeeded. There have been so
many revolutions and it has never happened. Look at the
Communists with their divisions, their armies and the totalitarian
state, and look at all the horrors that go on in the rest of the world;
there is no order anywhere. One realizes that there must be
physical order. Now does that order depend on the administration
of the law, on the authority of society according to its culture and
environment? Or does it depend entirely on the human being, on
each one of us, the way we live, the way we think, the way we act
in our relationships with one another? So, let's begin there. That is,
living as a human being in a destructive, chaotic, violent world,
how am I, or how are you, going to bring about order? Does that
order depend on you or on the politician? Does that order depend
on you, or on the priest, or on the philosopher, or on an utopian
ideal?
If you depend on the priest, on the politician, on a theory, on a
belief, or on an ideal, see what takes place! You are then
conforming to a pattern set by the politician, by the theorist, by an
utopian ideal; hence there is a conflict between what you are and
what you think should be. And that conflict is part of this violence,

this disorder. So can you perceive that order in society can be
brought about only by you and by nobody else? We are responsible
for that order by our conduct, by our thoughts, by our way of life the whole of it. And is that your real, deep, abiding interest, to
discover what that order is? One must live when the world is in
confusion and chaos, with its suffering and destruction - and to
understand this confusion, one must live in total, complete order. If
you are interested, if you are prepared to give your energy, your
capacity, your passion to finding out what that order is, then we
can go into it, then we can share this thing together; you won't be
just an outsider looking in, because it's your problem and you must
put your teeth into it! If that is your real, deep interest, then you
must be passionate. I'm not talking about lust, about physical
passion or sexual passion. I'm talking of that passion which comes
when there is deep interest.
Say, for instance, one is deeply interested in finding out if
sorrow can ever end (deeply interested, not superficially because it
brings a reward, but because you really want to find out)-sorrow,
the grief, the pain, the anxiety, the fear, which we all feel. If that
sorrow can ever come to an end, then you will find that only then
comes real passion, real intensity. So, is it your intention to
discover for yourselves whether, living in this world, whether it is
possible to bring about such order within yourselves? - because
you are the world, and the world is you.
Questioner: You said you must have passion, but earlier on you
stated that as we grow older our passion is dulled: so what are we
to do?
Krishnamurti: Do our passions become dull as we grow older?

Perhaps our physical passions do, because our glands are not
working so efficiently, but we are not talking about the passion of
the young or of the old and the dissipation of that passion. We are
talking about having an interest, a vital interest, a major issue with
which you, as a human being, are concerned - not a gift, a
technique, a capacity. If you have such a deep interest and you live
with it, then out of that comes passion. And that passion doesn't
disappear just because you have grey hair.
Questioner: What happens when you have this deep interest, but
also you have the desire for pleasure?
Krishnamurti: You have pleasure on the one hand and a vital,
abiding interest on the other. please just listen to it! Is there a
contradiction between pleasure and a vital interest? If I am vitally
interested in bringing about order within myself and in the world
around me, then that becomes my most profound pleasure. I may
have a nice car, I may look at a girl, or at the hills and all the rest of
it; but they are all passing, trivial things which will in no way
contradict my vital interest which is my pleasure. You see, we
divide pleasure in ourselves; we say it would be nice to have a
lovely car or listen to beautiful music. There is great delight in
listening to music; it may quieten and pacify your nerves by its
rhythm and quality of sound; it may carry you away to distant
places, far away, and in that there is great pleasure. But that
pleasure does not detract from your vital interest; on the contrary.
When you have a tremendous interest in something, then that very
interest becomes the major pleasure in your life; and all other
pleasures become secondary and trivial; in that there is no
contradiction. But when we are not sure of our major interest in

life, then we are pulled in different directions by various pleasures
and objects; and then there is a contradiction. So one has to find
out, and I hope you will find out during these coming weeks, what
is your major interest in which passion and pleasure exist.
Questioner: Do you not think that this order can only come
about by giving to God the place he should hold in our lives? All
the chaos that exists in the world today is because we live without
the idea of God?
Krishnamurti: To bring about this order in our lives, should we
give first place to God? If we have no knowledge of God, no
feeling for God, no understanding of that thing called God, then
order becomes mechanical, superficial, and changeable. God is the
most important thing, the questioner says, and then out of that will
come order. Now, we are trying to investigate; we are not going to
deny or to assert; we are trying to find out, to enquire. Our main
difficulty is that we all interpret, or imagine what God is, according
to our own culture, according to our own background, our fears,
our pleasures, our sense of security and so on. Surely that is
obvious. And if we don't know this ultimate reality and have no
knowledge of it, can that bring about order? We are enquiring,
trying to find out. Or must you have physical order first, which is
measurable, and then having established that order, find out the
immeasurable, in which order is something entirely different?
This has been the point of view of all the religious people
throughout the world: concern yourselves with God and then you
will have perfect order. And each religion, each sect, translates
what God is according to its own beliefs and, brought up in that
belief, we accept that interpretation. But if you really want to find

out if there is such a thing as God, something that cannot possibly
be put into words, something which is unnameable, if that really is
the major interest in your life, then that very interest does bring
about order. To find that reality, one must live differently: there
must be austerity without harshness; there must be love. And love
cannot exist if there is fear, or the mind is pursuing pleasure. So, to
find that reality one must understand oneself, the structure and the
nature of the self; and the structure and the nature of oneself is
measurable by thought. It is measurable in the sense that thought
can perceive its own activities, thought can see what it has created,
what it has denied, what it has accepted; and when one realizes the
limitations of thought, then perhaps one can go into that which lies
beyond thought.
Questioner: The problem of the parent is what to teach our
children.
Krishnamurti: First of all, what is our relationship with our
children? please bear in mind that we are investigating together. If
you are the father, you go to the office and come home late in the
evening. If you are the mother, you have your own ambitions and
drives, your own loneliness and miseries, your own worries about
being loved or not being loved; the children have to be looked after
and there is the cooking and the washing-up; and if there is not
enough money, you also probably go off to earn a living. Then
what is your relationship with your children? Have you any
relationship?
We are investigating, we are enquiring. I am not saying you
don't have any relationship. Then, as they grow up you hand them
over to a school where they are taught how to read and write; there

they form gangs with other children who are also imitating and
conforming and who are equally lost. You have the problem not
only of your own children but also of other children who are
bullying gangsters. Then what is your relationship with your child?
You have children and you want to educate them rightly. Now, if
that is really your deep, vital interest, you have to find out what is
the meaning of education. Is it merely for children to acquire a
particular kind of technological knowledge, so that they can earn a
livelihood in a world that is becoming more and more competitive,
because there are more and more people and therefore less and less
jobs? You must face all this.
The world is divided by nationalities, with their sovereign
governments, their armies and their navies, and all the butchery
that goes with them. And if you are only concerned with the
development of technological knowledge, then see the
consequences of all that; the mind becomes more and more
mechanical and you neglect the whole field of life. When the
children grow up, if they are lucky they are sent to a university,
where they are shaped more and more, forced to conform and put
in a cage. Is that your interest? Is that your responsibility? And
because they don't want to be put into a cage, they are in revolt.
Please, see all this. And when that revolt proves to be ineffective,
there is violence.
How are you, as a parent, going to educate your children to be
different? Can you form a new kind of educational system, or can
you, with the help of others, start a school which will be totally
different? To do that you must have money and a group of people
who are really dedicated. If you are a parent, is it not your

responsibility to see that such schools are created? So you must
work for it; you know, life isn't a plaything. Now, is this your deep,
vital interest or, as a parent, are you only concerned with your own
ambitions, greed, envy, with your position at the office, getting
higher pay, a larger house, a bigger car and so on? You have to
look at all this. Therefore, where does education begin? Does it
start at school or with you? That means, are you, as a parent, as a
human being, re-educating yourself all the time?
Questioner: Is there any meaning in education, or will our
children finish up just like us?
Krishnamurti: I was told that Socrates complained about the
youth of his day. He said that they had no manners and no respect
for their elders, that they were becoming permissive, and all the
rest of it; and that was in Athens in the fourth century B.C. And we
are still complaining about our children. So we are asking: does the
education of children consist in training them to be like us, like
other monkeys, or should education include not only technological
instruction but also a deep understanding of the whole neglected
field of life? The whole of life, not just one fragment of it, because
the way we live we neglect all that, we are concerned only with
one fragment; therefore there is chaos and violence in the world.
Questioner: Are you saying that we should only have one main
interest? Should we not be interested in many things, in war, in
pollution, and so on? Surely you have to be aware of these things,
haven't you?
Krishnamurti: Sir, when there is a major interest in your life,
then you are aware of everything. When you are interested in
order, it is not only order in yourself but order in the world. You

don't want wars; you feel for those people because they have no
order. You know what is happening, therefore, you are very
concerned with pollution, poverty and war. Wars are created by
nationalities, by governments, by politicians, by dividing religion
into sects and all the rest of it. in observing all that, I want order,
not only order in myself, but in the world. And in wanting order, I
have to find order in everything around me, which means I must
work for order, `be dedicated to order, be passionate about order.
That means I have no nationality, do you follow, Sir? Disorder is
violence, therefore I must find out how to end completely all
violence within myself.
Questioner: Do you believe in demonstrations?
Krishnamurti: You go up and down the street with a group of
people demonstrating against the war in Vietnam. Do you want to
end the war in Vietnam or do you want to end all wars? Can you
demonstrate to end all wars or can you only demonstrate to end a
particular war? Do think about this, give your heart to it. I can
demonstrate against a particular war, but when I am concerned
with the ending of all wars, not only outwardly but in myself, how
can I demonstrate with a group of people? Do you also want to end
all wars as I do? Do you understand? It means no nationality, no
frontiers, no linguistic differences, no religious divisions - all that.
No, Sir, you can't demonstrate, you have to live it. And when you
live it, that in itself is a demonstration.
Questioner: Do not love and truth bring about order?
Krishnamurti: But do you know what love is, Sir? Do you know
what truth is? Can you love if you are jealous, greedy, ambitious?
And is truth something fixed, static, or is it living, vital, moving,

without any path to it. You have to find all this out for yourself.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VII CHAPTER 2 2ND PUBLIC TALK SAANEN
20TH JULY 1971 'ORDER'
WE WERE TALKING about order. In a world that is so utterly
confused and divided, in a world that is so violent and brutal, one
would have thought that our main interest in life would be to bring
about this order, not only in ourselves but also outwardly.
Order is not habit; habit becomes automatic and loses all its
vitality when human beings merely become orderly in the
mechanical sense. Order, as we were saying, covers not only our
own particular life but also all the life about us, outwardly, in the
world, and deeply inwardly. Now, being aware of this disorder, this
confusion, how is one to bring about order in oneself without any
conflict and without it becoming merely habitual, a routine,
mechanical and neurotic? One has observed those people who are
very orderly; they have a certain rigidity, they have no pliability;
they are not quick and have become rather hard, self-centred,
because they are following a particular pattern which they consider
to be order; and gradually that becomes a neurotic state. So being
aware that this kind of order (which is disorder) becomes
mechanical and leads to neurosis, nevertheless one realizes that one
must have order in one's life. Then how is this to come about? That
is what we are going to consider together this morning.
One must have physical order. It is essential to have a welldisciplined, sensitive, alert body, because that reacts on the mind.
And how is one to have a highly sensitive organism that doesn't
become rigid, hard, forced into a particular pattern or design -

which the mind thinks is orderly and so forces the body to conform
to. This is one of the problems. Then there must be order in the
whole totality of the mind, of the brain. The mind is the capacity to
understand, the ability to observe logically, sanely, to function
totally, all round, not fragmentarily, not to be caught in
contradictory desires, purposes and intentions. How is this whole
quality of mind to have total order, psychosomatic order without
conformity, without the enforcement of a thought-up discipline?
See our difficulty first, what is involved in all this. One has to
have order; this is absolutely essential. We are going to investigate
together what we mean by that order. There is the order of the
older generation, which is really total disorder as one observes its
activities throughout the world, in business, in religion, in the
economic field, amongst nations and everywhere else; there is total
disorder.
In reaction to that there is the permissive society, the younger
generation, who do quite the opposite to the older generation,
which is also disorder - isn't it? A reaction is disorder. And how is
the mind, with all its subtleties of thought, with all the images
thought has built, the images that it has built about another, and the
images about itself, the images of the "what is" and the "what
should be" (therefore living in a state of contradiction), how is such
a mind to have complete, total order within itself, so that there is
no fragmentation, no reaction to a pattern and no contradiction of
the opposites out of which arises violence? Now, seeing all this,
how is the mind, your mind, to have complete, total order in action
and in thought, in every movement both psychologically and
physiologically?

The religious people have said that you can only have order
through belief in a higher life, through belief in God, belief in
something outside, and that you must conform, adjust, imitate
according to that belief; that through discipline you must force
your whole nature and change the structure of the psyche, as well
as your physiological state. They have said all this. And there is a
group of behaviourists who say that environment forces you to
behave; if you don't behave properly then it destroys you. And
people live that way, according to their own particular belief,
whether it be the Communist belief, some religious belief or a
sociological, economic belief.
In spite of this division in the world, the contradiction in
ourselves as well as in society, and the counter culture against the
existing culture, they all say that there must be order in the world;
the military say it and so do the priests. And is order mechanical?
Can order be brought about through discipline? Can order be
brought about through conformity, imitation and control? Or, is
there an order that has nothing whatever to do with control, with
discipline as we know it, that has nothing whatever to do with
conformity, with adjustment and so on?
Let us look at this whole idea of control and find out whether it
does bring order (which doesn't mean we are talking against
control). We are trying to understand; and if we understand, we
may discover something entirely different. I hope you are
following all this and that you are as interested in it and as
passionate about it as I am. It is utterly useless to listen casually to
some theoretical idea; we are not discussing theories or
hypotheses; we are observing actually what is going on, seeing

what is false. The very perception of seeing what is false is the
truth. Do you understand?
Now what is implied in control? All our culture, all our
education and the upbringing of our children is based on that; and
in ourselves there is this urge to control. Now what is implied in
that? We have never asked ourselves why we should control at all?
Now, let us go into this question. Control implies, does it not, a
controller and the thing to be controlled. Please give your attention
to this. I am angry and I must control my anger; and where there is
control, there is conflict; "I must" and "I must not". And conflict
obviously distorts the mind. A mind is healthy when it has no
conflict at all; then it can function without any friction and such a
mind is a sane, clear mind, but control denies that, because in
control there is conflict and contradiction, there is the desire to
imitate and to conform to a pattern - the thing you think you ought
to do. Is this clear?
So control is not order. This is very important to understand.
One can never have order through control, because order implies
functioning clearly, seeing wholly, without any distortion; but
where there is conflict, there must be distortion. Control also
implies suppression, conformity, adjustment and the division
between the observer and the observed. We are going to find out
what it is to act or bring about order without control. Not that we
are denying the whole structure of control, but we are seeing the
falseness of it and, therefore, out of that comes the truth of order.
Are we following each other, not verbally but actually doing it as
we go along, because we are trying to create an entirely different
world, a different culture, to bring about a human being who lives

without friction? It is only such a mind which is capable of living
without distortion that knows what love is. And control in any form
does breed distortion, conflict and an unhealthy mind.
The old culture has said that you must discipline, and this
discipline begins with children at home, then in schools and
colleges and right the way through life. Now that word "discipline"
means to learn; it does not mean drilling, conforming, suppressing
and so on. And a mind that is learning all the time, is actually in a
state of order, but the mind that is not learning, which says "I have
learnt", such a mind brings disorder. The mind itself resists being
drilled, becoming mechanical, conforming and suppressing, which
is all implied by discipline. And yet we said there must be order.
How is this order to come into being without discipline in the
accepted sense of that word?
Seeing the problem, which is very complex, what is your
answer? If you are exercising your mind, if you are really deeply
interested in this question of order, not only inwardly in yourself
but also outwardly, what is your response to it? How do you find
an answer to this urge for order, which does not depend on control,
on discipline, on conformity and that totally denies all authority which is freedom, isn't it? If there is any form of authority, then in
the acceptance of that authority there is conformity, there is a
following; and that breeds contradiction and therefore disorder.
So, no control, in the usual meaning of that word "discipline",
and a total denial of the whole structure and nature of authority,
which negates freedom. And yet there must be order; see the
complications of it. There is the authority of law, of the policeman,
the civil authority that one must abide by; but there must be

freedom from the authority of the elders with their beliefs, and the
authority of one's own demands, experience, knowledge; because
all that denies freedom. Seeing the actual state of the world as it is,
observing our culture, social, economic and religious, our
educational system and the family relationship, we see that they are
all based on this authority. And it has caused utter confusion, great
suffering, wars and the fragmentation of the world, as well as the
division of man. Observing this, how is one to bring about order?
That is your problem - you understand? How will you answer that
question if you are really deeply, passionately, interested in trying
to bring order to your life, as well as outwardly? What will your
answer be? Will you turn to books, to the priests, to the
philosophers, to the gurus, to the latest person who says, "I am
enlightened, come and I'll tell you all about it?" To whom will you
turn - to find out how to live a life that is totally orderly, denying
all conformity, all authority, all discipline and control? You have to
answer this question. We are coming to the problem afresh, that is,
afresh in the sense that we don't know how to bring order out of
this chaos. If you say, order should be this or that, then you are
reacting to "what is", you are stating something which is in
opposition to "what is", a reaction that has no validity whatever. So
we are approaching the problem anew; we have so far only
examined the actual fact of what is going on in the world and in
ourselves, the actual fact. Now, we are going to find out together
what order is. You are not accepting anything the speaker says, be
quite sure about this, because if you do, then our relationship
changes entirely. But if we are examining together, being totally
interested in this issue, which is, that realizing the state of

confusion in the world, and seeing the disorder in ourselves, in all
our lives, how tawdry they are, realizing the actual fact of this, then
we need intensity and passion to discover what is order.
We are going to find out, first of all, what it means to learn by
observing "What is" and learning from that. Learning means the
active present of that verb to learn, which is a constant movement
of learning, not having learnt and then applying that knowledge,
which is something quite different from learning all the time. Do
you see the difference? We are learning together; we are not
storing up knowledge and then acting according to that knowledge;
in that there is contradiction and therefore control, whereas a mind
that is constantly learning has no authority, no contradiction, no
control, no discipline, but the very learning itself demands order.
Please observe yourself. Are you in a state of learning - or waiting
to be told what order is? Do watch yourself. If you are waiting to
find out from another what order is, then you are dependent on that
person, or on that book, or on that priest, or on that structure and so
on. So we are learning together. Is that your state of mind, that you
have understood control and all its implications, understood the full
significance of discipline and also you are completely aware of
what authority entails? If you have understood, then you are free;
otherwise you cannot learn. Learning means a mind that is curious,
that doesn't know, that is eager to find out, interested. Is your mind
like that, interested? Are you saying I don't know what order is but
I am going to find out? Are you very curious, passionate and
deeply interested, is your mind like that and, therefore, willing to
learn, not from another but to learn for yourself by the act of
observation? Control and authority, which to you mean discipline,

prevent observation. Do you see this? A mind can only learn when
it is free, when it doesn't know, otherwise you cannot learn.
So, is your mind free to observe the world and observe
yourself? You cannot observe if you are saying "This is right" and
"This is wrong", "I must control", "I must suppress", "I must obey",
"I must disobey" - you follow? And, if you are saying that I must
live a permissive life, then you are not free to learn; if you are
conforming, you are not free to learn. Are you conforming when
you have long hair? Am I conforming because I put on a shirt and
trousers? please find out. Conformity is not merely to a national
pattern, to a particular structure of a society or to a belief, but there
is conformity in little things. And such a mind is incapable of
learning, because behind this conformity there is this enormous
sense of fear; the young have it as well as the old and that is why
they conform. If all that is going on, you are not free to learn.
And there must be order, something living and beautiful, not a
mechanical thing - the order of the universe, the order that exists in
mathematics, the order that exists in nature, in the relationship
between various animals, an order that human beings have totally
denied, because in ourselves we are in disorder, which means that
we are fragmentary, contradictory, frightened and all the rest of it.
Now, I am asking myself, and you are asking yourself, whether
the mind is capable of learning, because it doesn't know what order
is. It knows reaction to disorder, but the mind must discover
whether it is actually capable of learning without reaction and can
therefore be free to observe. In other words, is your mind aware of
the problem of control, of discipline, of authority and the constant
response of reaction - are you aware of that whole structure? Are

you aware of all this in yourself as you live from day to day? Or
are you only aware when it is pointed out to you? please see the
difference. If you are aware of this whole problem of confusion,
discipline, control and suppression, which is conformity, because
you have been observing, living, and watching, then it is your own;
the other is secondhand. Now which is it?
For most of us, it is secondhand, because we are secondhand
people, aren't we? All our knowledge is secondhand, our traditions
are secondhand; there may perhaps be a few activities that are
totally our own and not of another. So, are we aware that it is our
own direct perception, and not secondhand knowledge learnt from
another? Now, if it is learnt from another, one has to discard that
totally, hasn't one? You have to discard all that has been said just
now by the speaker about the implications of control, discipline,
authority and so on; then you become aware that what has been
pointed out to you must be totally rejected in order to learn. If you
have rejected what others, including the speaker, have said, then
you are actually learning, aren't you?
Now, let's find out together what order means. How do you find
out what order is when you don't know anything about it? You can
only do this by enquiring into the state of the mind that is trying to
find out what order is. I only know what disorder is, I am
completely familiar with it, the whole culture of disorder in this
present society; I know it very well. But I don't know what order is;
I can imagine what order is; I can theorize about it, but theories,
imagination, speculation are not order; therefore I discard all that.
So, I really don't know what order is. My mind knows what
disorder is, how it has come into being through the culture and the

conditioning of that culture and of the human beings; I am aware of
all that which is total disorder. Now I really don't know what order
is, so what is the state of the mind that says I don't know? What is
the state of your own mind that says, "I really don't know?" Is that
state of mind waiting for an answer, waiting to be told, expecting
to find order? If it is waiting, expecting to be told, then it is not the
state which we are talking about, the state of not knowing. The
state of "not knowing" is not waiting to be told, it is not expecting
an answer; it is terribly alive, active, but it does not know; it knows
what is disorder and therefore rejects it completely. When such a
mind says, `I do not know, then it is totally free. It has denied the
disorder and because it is free, it has found order. Do you
understand this? It is really marvellous if you go into it for
yourself.
I don't know what order is and I am not waiting for anybody to
tell me. And because my mind has denied everything that is
disorder, totally, without holding back a thing, has emptied the
cupboard completely, it is free; so it is capable of learning. And
when the mind is totally free, which means non-fragmented, then it
is in a state of order. Have you understood this?
Now, is your mind in total order, otherwise don't go any further.
Nobody, no teacher, no guru, no saviour, no philosopher, can teach
you what order is; in denying totally all authority, you are free
from fear, and therefore you can find out what order is. Now, are
you aware of your mind, of yourself, of your life - not the holiday
life sitting here for an hour listening to a talk - but aware of your
daily life, of your family life, of your relationship with each other?
And in that life are you aware of the daily routine, the monotony,

the boredom of going to the office? Are you aware of the quarrels,
of the brutalities, of the nagging and the violence, of everything
which is the result of a culture that is total disorder, which is your
life? You can't pick and choose out of that disorder what you think
is order. Are you aware that your life is disorderly and if you
haven't got the interest, the passion, the intensity, the flame to find
order, then you will pick and choose what you think is order out of
the disorder. Can you observe yourself with great honesty, without
any sense of hypocrisy or double talk, know for yourself that your
life is disorderly, and can you put all that aside to find out what
order is? You know, putting aside disorder is not so very difficult;
we dramatise it, make much of it. But when you see something
very dangerous, a precipice, a wild animal, or a man with a gun,
you avoid it instantly, don't you? There is no arguing, no hesitation,
no temporising, there is immediate action. In the same way, when
you see the danger of disorder, there is instant action which is the
total denial of the whole culture which has brought about disorder,
which is yourself.
Questioner: Is not the problem how to look?
Krishnamurti: We have been asking, "Is one free to look?" You
don't want to look, do you? Do you really want to look at all the
things that you value, that you cherish, the beliefs which you think
are important and which are surrounded by a great deal of
confusion? Are you capable of looking at all that? Come on, Sirs, it
is not my problem. Are you capable of looking at yourself without
any distortion? Have you ever looked at yourself without one
image looking at a lot of other images?
Questioner: Aren't we conforming to a certain pattern now? You

speak for an hour and then we ask questions. Isn't that a pattern
too?
Krishnamurti: Is this a pattern? You can make anything into a
pattern; sitting on a chair is a pattern, sitting on the ground
becomes a pattern. But is this a pattern? If it is, then let us break it
up. You see, I am asking a question which is: have you ever looked
at yourself? I am not talking about looking at your face in the
mirror. But do you know what it means to look at yourself actually
as you really are? Does that frighten you? You are frightened
because you have an image about yourself, haven't you? You think:
I am better than that, I am more noble than that; or how dreadfully
ugly, how old I am, how decrepit, how diseased, how silly I am.
All that prevents you from looking, doesn't it? I just want to see
myself as I am. I don't want to pick and choose out of what I see; I
just want to look. Does that take a great deal of courage? My
interest, my passion to observe what I actually am makes me look,
not my fear of finding out what I am I don't know if you are
meeting this point I am vitally tremendously interested in seeing
what I am, whatever it is - are you? In my relationships, I want to
see whether I lie or tell the truth, or whether I am frightened; I
want to see if I am greedy or ambitious, I want to watch all the
subtle movements that creep in and out of my life.
Now, how do I look at myself? Is my mind capable of looking
at itself? Does that mean one thought separating itself to look at
other thoughts? The one thought that has separated itself from the
other thought then says: this is right, this is wrong, this is good, this
is bad, this I shall keep, this I won't keep, how frightened I am,
how ugly - you follow? Now, is that looking? When one thought

separates itself from the other thoughts, is such a thought capable
of looking? Or can you look at yourself only when there is no
fragmentation of thought?
Have you ever looked at yourself - the way you behave, why
you behave like that, how you walk, how you talk, how you listen?
Are you aware of what your body is doing, watching your nervous
reactions like the twitching of your fingers? Are you aware of
yourself, your thoughts, your feelings, of your inner motives, your
inner drives and urges - are you completely aware of all this, not
correcting it, but observing, watching looking?
Questioner: It is very difficult not to analyse.
Krishnamurti: When you are analysing, you are not looking.
Questioner: I know.
Krishnamurti: You don't know otherwise you wouldn't analyse.
Look, I want to see what is in the cupboard of my mind, what is
stored up there; I want to read all the things it contains because the
content of the mind is the mind. I want to see what I am during the
waking hours, walking, talking, making gestures, when I am at the
office, when I am angry, in the fleeting moments of pleasure and
sex, and the delight of seeing the hills, the streams, the trees, the
birds and the clouds. But I also want to see myself when I am
asleep, be aware of what is going on. Don't you want to see
yourself, awake and asleep? You think you do. Do you know what
it means to learn about yourself? It means hard work, daily
observation, watching, watching, watching, but not self-centred
watching, just watching, like you watch a bird, or the movement of
a cloud; you can't change the movement of the cloud, so just watch
in the same way.

And the next question is: can the mind be watchful of what it is
doing when it is asleep? We haven't time to go into that now,
perhaps another day.
Questioner: I would like to examine the relationship between
you and us. You say you are not a guru, but you talk and we listen;
we ask questions and you answer them, so could we look at this
relationship?
Krishnamurti: Are we taking a journey together? Or are you
merely following? It is for you to tell me, not for me to tell you.
What is it you are doing? Are we journeying together or are you
being led - which is it? If you are being led, if you are following,
there is no relationship, because the speaker says, "Don't follow."
He is neither your authority nor your guru; if you insist on
following, if you insist on listening in order to learn what he is
saying, then there is no relationship. But if you say, "I want to
learn," we are taking a journey together into the extraordinary
world in which we live, and that world is "me" and I want to
penetrate into that "me", I want to learn; then we are together, then
we have a relationship.
Questioner: But is it really together you sit up there and we are
down here?
Krishnamurti: I happen to sit on the platform because it is more
convenient, because you can see me and I can see you. It is of no
account whether you are sitting up here or down there - we are
taking a journey together into a world in which there is neither
height nor depth; it is that world which we are trying to understand.
So I come back to my question which is: have you ever looked
at yourself? Have you ever looked at yourself for any length of

time, as you look at yourself in a mirror when you are shaving, or
brushing your hair, or when you make-up? Have you ever spent ten
minutes, as you do at a mirror, watching yourself, without any
choice, without any sense of judgment or evaluation, just watching
yourself? That is the main issue.
-- Page 318 --

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VII CHAPTER 3 3RD PUBLIC TALK SAANEN
22ND JULY 1971 'CAN WE UNDERSTAND
OURSELVES?'
Most of us live a very superficial life and are content to lead such a
life, meeting all our problems superficially and thereby increasing
them, because our problems are extraordinarily complex, very
subtle and need deep penetration and understanding. Most of us
like to treat our problems at a superficial level according to the old
tradition, or we try to adjust ourselves to a modern tendency, so we
never resolve totally and completely any of our problems, such as
war, conflict, violence and so on. We also tend to look only on the
surface, not knowing how to penetrate deeply;within ourselves;
either we observe ourselves with a certain disgust, with a certain
foregone conclusion, or we look at ourselves hoping to change
what we see.
I think it is important, that we should understand ourselves
totally, completely, because as we said the other day, we are the
world and the world is us. This is an absolute fact; it is not merely
a verbal statement or a theory, but something that one feels deeply,
with all the agony of it, the suffering, the pain, the brutality, the
fragmentation, the division of nationalities and religions. And one
can never solve any of these problems without really understanding
oneself, because the world is oneself; and if I understand myself
there is a living at a totally different dimension. Is it possible for
each one of us to under- stand ourselves, not only at the superficial
level of our minds, but also to penetrate the deep levels of our

being? That is what we are going to talk over together this
morning; when we say we are going to talk it over together, it
doesn't mean that I talk and you listen - we are going to share it
together.
How is one to look at oneself? Is it possible to look at oneself
completely without the division of the conscious and the deeper
layers of consciousness, of which we are perhaps completely
unaware? Is it possible to observe, see the whole movement of the
"me", the self, the "what I am", with a non-analytical mind, so that
in the very observation itself there is instantly a total
understanding? That is what we are going to investigate; it is a very
important problem, to discover whether one can go beyond oneself
and find reality, to come upon something that is not measurable by
the mind, to live without any illusion. This has been the major aim
of every religion throughout the world; and in the process of this
search to go beyond oneself, they have been caught in various
myths, the Christian myth, the Hindu myth, the whole culture of
myths which is unnecessary and totally irrelevant.
Now is it possible to look at ourselves non-analytically and
therefore observe without the "me" observing? I want to
understand myself and I know the "me" is very complex; it is a
living thing, not something dead; it is a living, vital, moving thing,
it is not just an accumulation of memories, experiences, and
knowledge. It is a living thing as society is a living thing, because
we have created it. Now, is it possible to look without the observer
looking at the thing called the observed? If there is the observer
looking, then he must look through fragmentation, through division
and where there is division, both in myself and outwardly, there

must be conflict. Outwardly, the national conflicts, the religious
conflicts, the economic conflicts, and inwardly there is this vast
field, not only superficially but a wide area about which we know
almost nothing. So, if in looking there is this division as the "I" and
the "not I", as the observer and the observed, as the thinker and the
thought, as the experiencer and the experience, then there must be
conflict.
One asks whether it is possible - I am not saying it is, or it is
not; we are going to find out for ourselves - to observe oneself
without this division. And to find that out, we hope to come to that
state of perception which is without division, but not through
analysis - when there is a division between the analyser and the
thing analysed. In observing myself, there is the actual fact of this
division. When I observe myself I say, "This is good, This is bad",
"This is right, this is wrong", "This has value, this has no value",
"This has relevancy and that has not". Therefore, when I look at
myself, the observer is conditioned by the culture in which he has
lived; so the observer is the memory, the observer is the entity that
is conditioned - the "me". According to that conditioned
background of the "me", I judge, I evaluate; I observe myself
according to that culture, and according to my conditioning I hope
to bring about a change in the observed. This is what we are doing
all the time: hoping to change what is observed through analysis,
through control, through reformation and so on. That is a fact.
And I want to find out why this division exists, so I begin to
analyse to discover the cause. The analysis is not only to find the
cause, but one also hopes to go beyond it. I am angry, greedy,
envious, brutal, violent, neurotic, or whatever it is, and I begin to

analyse the cause of this neurotic state.
Analysis is part of our culture because we have been trained
from childhood to analyse, hoping that in this way we shall solve
all our problems. Volumes have been written on it; the
psychologists hope to find the cause of neurosis, understand it and
go beyond.
Now what is involved in analysis? It implies time, doesn't it? I
need a great deal of time to analyse myself. I must very carefully
examine every reaction, every incident, every thought and trace it
to its source; all that takes time. Meanwhile other incidents are
going on, other happenings, other reactions, which I am incapable
of immediately understanding. That is one point: it takes time.
And analysis also implies that everything that is analysed must
be final and complete, and if it is not (which it can't be), then that
finding is incorrect, and with this faulty analysis I proceed to
examine the next experience, the next incident, the next bit of the
puzzle. So, all the time I am working from a false premise,
consequently my judgments and evaluations are wrong and I am
increasing the margin of error. Analysis, by its very nature, implies
an analyser and the person or thing analysed, whether the analyser
is the analyst, the psychologist, or you yourself; and the analyser in
his examination nourishes and sustains the division, and therefore
increases the conflict. Analysis implies all these things: time,
evaluation of every experience and of every thought completely
(which is not possible), and the division between the observer and
the observed that increases conflict.
Now I can analyse my surface mind, its superficial daily
activity, but how am I to understand, to investigate the much

deeper layers, because I want to understand myself totally, right
through? I don't want to leave any corner or dark spot unexamined;
I want to analyse everything, so that nothing remains which the
mind has not completely understood. If there is a corner that has
not been examined, then that corner distorts all thought, all action.
But analysis implies the postponement of action. When I am
analysing myself, I am not acting; I am waiting until my analysis is
over, then perhaps I shall act rightly; therefore analysis is the
denial of action. Action means now, not tomorrow. Seeing all this,
how can the mind understand its deep, hidden layers completely?
All this is implied in understanding myself.
Can understanding come through dreams? That is, is it possible
during sleep for dreams to reveal the deep layers of the
unconscious, or the thing that is hidden? The specialists say that
you must dream and that if you do not, it indicates a certain kind of
neurosis. They also say that dreams help you to understand all the
activities of the hidden mind. So one must enquire into the
meaning of dreams and whether we should dream at all. Or are
dreams merely in a symbolic form the continuation of our daily
life?
During the day the mind is occupied with all the trivialities of
daily life - office work, domesticity, the quarrels and the irritations
of relationship, image fighting image, and so on. Then, just before
you go to sleep, there is a taking stock of everything that has
happened throughout the day. Doesn't this happen to you just
before you fall asleep? You relive everything: "You should have
done this, you ought to have said that or said it differently; you go
over the whole period of the day, all your thoughts, all your

activities, how you were angry, jealous and all the rest of it.
Now, why does the mind do this? Why does it take stock of the
day's happenings and events? Is it not because the mind wants to
establish order? The mind goes over the day's activities because it
wants to bring everything into order; otherwise when you fall
asleep, the brain goes on working and tries to bring order in itself,
because the brain can only function normally, healthily, in
complete order. So if there is no order during the day, the brain
tries to establish order while the body is quiet, is asleep, and the
establishment of that order is part of the dreams. Do you accept all
that the speaker is saying?
Audience: No.
Krishnamurti: No? I am delighted. (Laughter.) Don't agree or
disagree. Find out for yourself, not according to some philosopher,
to some analyst, or psychologist, but find out for yourself. As long
as there is disorder in your daily life, the brain must establish order
otherwise it cannot function healthily, normally and efficiently.
And when there is disorder, dreams are necessary to bring about
order either deep down or at a superficial level.
Examining all this one asks is it necessary to dream at all
because it is very important not to dream; it is very important to
have a mind that is completely quiet when you are asleep, then the
whole mind, the whole brain, the whole body can rejuvenate itself.
But if the brain goes on working, working while you are asleep,
then it becomes exhausted, therefore neurotic, overstrained and all
the rest of it. So is it possible not to dream at all?
I am asking all these questions because I want to understand
myself: it is part of understanding myself. We are not merely

investigating dreams, assessing the importance or non-importance
of dreaming. Unless there is a deep understanding of oneself, all
action becomes superficial and contradictory and creates more and
more problems.
The old tradition says that to understand myself I must analyse,
introspect; but I see the falseness of all this. I reject it because it is
false although most of the psychologists say the opposite. And in
observing oneself one asks: why does one dream at all and is it
possible for the whole mind to be completely quiet when one is
asleep? I am not asking this question, you are. I am only suggesting
it to you;you have to find out. Now, how are you going to find out?
I realize that when the organism is quiet, completely still, the
body is able,to gather energy and is capable of functioning more
efficiently. When the body has no rest, is driven from morning
until night without a pause, it soon wears out, breaks down; but if
the body can rest for ten or twenty minutes during the day, then it
has more energy. The mind is very active, watching, observing,
criticizing, evaluating, struggling and all the rest of it. And when it
goes to sleep, the same momentum is kept going. So I am asking
myself whether during sleep the mind can be absolutely quiet. Just
see the beauty of the question, not the answer yet. Unless the body
is extraordinarily still, without any movement, without any
gestures or nervous twitches, and all the things that one does,
unless it is absolutely quiet (not forced to be quiet) and relaxed, it
cannot recuperate, it cannot gather energy.
Therefore I want to find out whether the mind can be absolutely
quiet during the night when it is asleep; and I see it can only be
quiet if every incident, every happening during the day is

understood instantly, not carried over. If I carry over a problem
from one day to the next, the mind is continuously engaged; but if
the mind can solve the problem immediately, today, then it is
finished. Is it possible for the mind each day to be so totally aware
that problems no longer exist? By the evening, you have a clear,
clean slate. If you do this, not just play with it, actually work at it,
you will find that when the brain needs rest, it becomes very quiet,
completely still; even ten minutes rest is enough. And if you pursue
this very deeply, you will find that dreams become totally
unnecessary because there is nothing to dream about; you are not
concerned with your future, whether you are going to be a great
doctor, a great scientist, or a brilliant writer, or whether you are
going to reach enlightenment the day after tomorrow; you are not
concerned with the future at all. I am afraid you don't see the
beauty of all this! The mind is no longer projecting anything in
time.
Now, having stated all that, can the mind, which is really the
observer (not only the visual observer, the eyes and so on), can the
mind observe without division? You understand the question? Can
the mind observe without the division between the observer and the
observed, because there is only the observed, not the observer.
Let us examine what the observer is. Surely the observer is the
past, be it the past of a few seconds ago, of yesterday, or of many,
many years, living as a conditioned entity in a particular culture.
The observer is the sum total of past experiences. The observer is
also knowledge. The observer is within the field of time. When he
says I will be "that", he has projected "that" from his past
knowledge - whether it be pleasure, pain, suffering, fear, delight

and so on - he says I must become that. The past therefore is going
through the present, which is modified and which he calls the
future, but it is really a projection of the past: so the observer is the
past. You live in the past, don't you? Just think of it. You are the
past, you live in the past and that is your life. Past memories, past
delights, past remembrances, the things that gave you pleasure and
displeasure, the failures, the disappointments, the lack of fulfilment
and the misery, everything is in the past. And through the eyes of
the observer you judge the present, which is living, moving, not a
static, dead thing.
When I look at myself, I am looking with the eyes of the past;
so I condemn, judge, evaluate, "This is right", "This is wrong",
good or bad according to my particular culture and tradition,
according to the knowledge and experience which I have gathered.
Therefore it prevents observation of the living thing, which is the
"me". And that "me" may not be "me" at all, because I only know
the "me" as the past. When the Muslim says that he is a Muslim, he
is the past, conditioned by the culture in which he has been brought
up; it is the same with the Catholic or the Communist.
So when we talk about living, we are talking about living in the
past and there is conflict between the past and the present, becauseI am conditioned. I cannot meet the living present unless I break
down my conditioning, and my conditioning is deliberately
brought about by my parents, my grandparents, to keep me in the
narrow line of their belief, of their tradition, to continue with their
mischief and their misery. We are doing that all the time; we live in
the past, not only through our conditioning, through the culture in
which we have lived, but also through every experience, incident

and happening in our life. I see a beautiful sunset and I think how
marvellous it is with the light, the shadows, the rays of the sun on
the distant hills, and it has already been stored up as memory and
tomorrow I say I must look at that sunset again and see its beauty.
Then I struggle to find it, and when I can't, I go to a museum and
the whole circus begins.
Now, can I look at myself with eyes that have never been
touched by time? Time involves analysis, time involves holding on
to the past, time involves this whole process of dreaming,
recollecting, gathering the past and holding it, all that. Can I look
at myself without the eyes of time? put that question to yourself.
Don't say you can or cannot. You don't know. And when you look
at yourself without the eyes of time, what or who is there to look?
Don't answer me, please. Do you understand my question? I have
looked at myself with the quality, the nature and the structure of
time, the past. I have looked at myself through the eyes of the past;
I have no other eyes to look. I have looked at myself as a Catholic,
or something else, which is the past? so my eyes are incapable of
looking at "what is" without time, which is the past.
Now I am asking a question, which is: can the eyes observe
without the past?
Let me put it differently. I have an image of myself, created and
imposed upon me by the culture in which I have lived; I also have
my own particular image of myself, what I should be and what I
am not. In fact, we have a great many images; I have an image
about you, about my wife, my children, my political leader, my
priest, and so on; so I have dozens of images. Don't you have
them?

Questioner: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Now, how can you look without an image,
because if you look with an image, it is obviously a distortion?
You were angry with me yesterday, so I have created an image
about you, that you are no longer my friend, that you are ugly and
all the rest of it. If I look at you with that image next time I meet
you, that image will distort my perception. That image is of the
past, as are all my images, and I dare not get rid of any of those
images because I don't know what it would be like to look without
an image, so I cling to images. The mind depends on an image for
its survival. I wonder if you are following all this. So can the mind
observe without any image, without the image of the tree, cloud,
hills, without the image of my wife my children, my husband? Can
the mind be without any image in relationship?
It is the image that brings conflict in relationship. I cannot get
on with my wife because she has bullied me; that image has been
built up, day after day, and it prevents any kind of relationship; we
may sleep together but that is irrelevant; so there is conflict. Can
the mind look, observe without any image what has been put
together by time? That means, can the mind observe without any
image? Can it observe without the observer, which is the past,
which is the `me"? Can I look at you without the interference of the
conditioned entity, which is the `me"?
What do you say? "Impossible!" How do you know it is
impossible? The moment you say it is not possible, then you have
blocked yourself and if you say it is possible, it is also blocking
you; but if you say let's find out, let's examine, let's go into it, then
you will discover that the mind can observe without the eyes of

time. And when it so observes, then what is there to be observed?
I started out learning about myself; I have explored all the
possibilities of analysis, and I see that the observer is the past. The
observer is much more complex; one can go much deeper into it. I
see that the observer is the past, and the mind lives in the past
because the brain has evolved through time which is the past. And
in the past there is security - my house, my wife, my belief, my
status, my position, my fame, my shoddy little self; in that there is
great safety and security. So I am asking if the mind can observe
without any of that, and if it can, what is there to see except the
hills, the flowers, the colours, the people - you follow? Is there
anything in me to be observed? Therefore, the mind is totally free.
You may ask what is the point of the mind being free. The point
is that such a mind has no conflict, such a mind is completely quiet
and peaceful, not violent, and it is only this quality of mind that
can create a new culture, a new culture resolving this terrible thing
called loneliness. Don't you know all this? Therefore not knowing
how to resolve it, I attach myself to people, to ideas, to groups, to
activities, to demonstrations, to climbing the mountains and all the
rest of it. If only I could resolve totally this problem of loneliness
so that it doesn't exist at all. How am I to be beyond this loneliness
which man has inwardly fought at all times? He feels lonely,
empty, insufficient, incomplete and he says there is God, there is
this, there is that; he projects an outside agency. How can the mind
free itself from this terrible burden of what it calls loneliness?
Have you ever realized what horrors we commit out of this feeling
of loneliness? We will go into this next time.
-- Page 332 --

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VII CHAPTER 4 4TH PUBLIC TALK SAANEN
25TH JULY 1971 'LONELINESS'
MOST OF US realize, when we dare look at it, that we are terribly
lonely, isolated human beings. Whether we are consciously or
unconsciously aware of it, we want to escape from it, because we
do not know what lies behind and beyond it; being frightened, we
run away from it through attachment, through activity and every
form of religious or worldly entertainment. This is fairly obvious
when one observes it in oneself. We isolate ourselves by our
everyday activities, by our attitude and our way of thinking;
although we may have an intimate relationship with somebody, we
are always thinking about ourselves. The result of this is more
isolation, more loneliness, a greater dependence on outward things,
greater attachments and the resultant suffering which arises from it.
I do not know if you are aware of all this.
Perhaps as we are sitting here, we could become aware of this
thing called loneliness and of the isolation, dependency and
suffering it brings. This is going on in ourselves all the time. If one
is observant one can see that our whole activity is self-centred. We
are thinking about ourselves endlessly: about our health, that we
must meditate, that we must change; we want a better job with
more money, a better relationship. `I want to attain enlightenment;
"I must achieve something in this life" - "me" and "my life", my
worries, my problems.
This eternal preoccupation with oneself is going on all the time;
we are devoted to ourselves. That is an obvious fact. And whether

we go to an office or to a factory, do social work or are concerned
with the welfare of the world, our self-concern motivates all our
activities; it is always "me" first. This self preoccupation which
operates in daily life and relationship does bring about isolation.
This again is fairly obvious, and if one goes into it very deeply one
discovers that this isolation is an awareness of being completely
alone, cut off, not having a relationship with anybody or anything.
You may be amongst a crowd, or sitting with a friend, when
suddenly this sense of utter isolation, of being completely cut off
from everybody comes upon you. I do not know if you have
noticed this or if it is something you have never experienced. When
we become aware of this loneliness, then we try to escape by being
occupied through domestic strife, or various forms of
entertainment, by trying to mediate, and so on.
Surely, all this indicates that the mind, whether it is shallow or
deep, superficial or merely caught in technological knowledge,
must cut itself off from every form of relationship if it is constantly
occupied with itself. Relationship is the most important thing in
life, because if you don't have a right relationship with the one, you
cannot possibly have it with any other human being. You can
imagine that you will have a better relationship with another, but it
is merely at the verbal level and therefore illusory. If you
understand that relationship between two human beings is the same
as relationship with the rest of the world, then isolation, loneliness,
has quite a different meaning.
So what is relationship? We are trying to find out whyhuman
beings are so desperately lonely. Not having love, but wanting to
be loved they cut themselves off, physically and psychologically

and thereby become neurotic. Most people are neurotic, slightly
unbalanced, caught in some particular idiosyncracy. It seems, if
you examine it closely, that all this arises from the utter lack of
relationship. So before we can understand how to bring an end to
this loneliness and suffering, to this ache and anxiety of human
existence, we must first of all go into this question of relationship what it means to be related.
Are we related at all with another? Thought asserts that we are
related, but actually we may not be, even though one human being
may have an intimate, a sexual relationship with another. Unless
one deeply understands the truth about relationship, it appears that
human beings must inevitably end in sorrow, in confusion and in
conflict. They may accept various forms of belief, or do social
work, but all that has no value, unless they have established
between themselves a relationship in which there is no conflict
whatever. Is that possible? Can you and I be related? Perhaps you
could have a very good relationship with me, because soon I am
going away and then it is finished. Can there be a relationship
between two human beings if each one is occupied with himself? if each one is concerned with his own ambitions and worries, his
opposition in the world and all the absurdity that human beings go
through? When a human being is caught in that net, can he have
any relationship with another?
Please, follow all this. Can there be any relationship between a
man and a woman when one is a Catholic and the other is a
Protestant, when one is a Hindu and the other is a Buddhist?
What then is relationship? It seems to me that it is one of the
most important things in life, because living is relationship. If there

is no relationship, there is no living at all; then life merely becomes
a series of conflicts, ending in separation or in divorce, in
loneliness, with all the fears, anxieties, problems of attachment,
and all the things that are involved in this sense of being
completely isolated. I am sure you know all this. One observes
how extraordinarily vital relationship is in life, and how very few
human beings have broken down the barrier that exists between
themselves and another. To break down this barrier with all
implications - not just the physical barrier - one has to go deeply
into this question of action.
What is action? Action is not future or past action, but acting. Is
it the result of,a conclusion and acting according to that
conclusion? Or is it based on some belief and acting according to
the belief? Is it based on some experience and acting according to
that experience or knowledge? If it is, then action is always in the
past, our relationship is always in the past, never in the present.
If I have a relationship with another - and relationship obviously
is action - throughout the days, weeks or years of that relationship I
have built an image and I act according to that image, and the other
acts according to the image which he has; so the relationship is not
between us but between these two images. Please do observe your
own minds, your own activity in relationship, and you will soon
find out the truth and validity of this statement. Our relationship is
based on images, and how can there be a relationship with another,
if it is merely the relationship of these images?
I am concerned with having a relationship in which there is no
conflict whatsoever, in which I am not using or exploiting another,
either sexually, for reasons of pleasure, or for the sake of

companionship. I see very clearly that conflict destroys any form
of relationship, so I must resolve that conflict at the very centre,
not at the periphery. And I can only put an end to conflict by
understanding action, not only in relationship but in daily life. I
want to find out if all my activities are isolating, in the sense that I
have built a wall round myself; the wall being myself concerned
with myself, with my future, my happiness, my health, my God,
with my belief, my success, my misery - you follow? Or is it that
relationship has nothing whatsoever to do with me or myself?
Myself is the centre, and all the activities that are concerned with
my happiness, my satisfaction, my glory must isolate. Where there
is isolation there must be attachment and dependency; when there
is uncertainty in that attachment and dependency then there is
suffering, and suffering implies isolation in any relationship. I see
all this very clearly, not verbally but actually - it is a fact.
For many years I have built images about myself and about
another; I have isolated myself through my activities, through my
beliefs and so on. So my first question is - how am I to be free of
these images? - the images of my God, my conditioning, that I
must achieve fame or enlightenment (which is the same thing), that
I must achieve success and so I am afraid of being a failure. I have
so many images about myself and about you. How am I to be free
of them? Can I end the building of images through the analytical
process? Obviously not.
Then what am I to do? It is a problem and I must end it, not
carry it over to the next day. If I do not end it today, then the
problem creates disorder, a disturbance, and the brain needs order
to function healthily, normally, not neurotically. I must establish

order now, during the day, otherwise the mind worries about it, has
dreams and is incapable of being fresh the next morning; so I must
end this problem.
How am I to prevent this building of images? By not creating a
super-image - obviously. I have many images and not being able to
be free of them the mind unfortunately invents a super. image, the
higher self, the Atman; or it introduces some outside agency, either
spiritual or the "Big Brother" of the communist world. So without
creating a higher, nobler image, there must be the ending of all the
images which I have created. I see that if I have one single image,
there is no possibility of any relationship, because images separate
and where there is separation there must be conflict, not only
nationally but between human beings; that is clear. Then how am I
to be rid of every image which I have gathered, so that the mind is
completely free, fresh and young, so that it can observe anew the
whole movement of life?
First of all, I must find out non-analytically how the images
come into being. That is, I must learn to observe. Is observation
based on analysis? I observe, I see - is that the result of analysis, of
practice, of time? Or is it an act outside of time? Zan has always
tried to go beyond time by various tricks and they have all failed.
Suspecting that perhaps he is incapable of getting rid of these
innumerable images, he has created a super-image, and to that
image he has become a slave, therefore he is not free. Whether that
super-image is the soul, the higher self, the State or anything else,
it is still not freedom: it is another image. Therefore I am vitally
interested in ending all images, because then only is there a
possibility of having a relationship with another; my concern is to

find out if it is at all possible to end the images instantly, not chase
one image after another. That will obviously lead nowhere.
So I must find out if I can break the mechanism of the mind
which builds images and at the same time go into the question of
what it is to be aware; because that may solve my problem, which
is the ending of all images. That gives freedom, and when there is
freedom then only is there a possibility of having a true
relationship in which every form of conflict has come to an end.
What does this awareness mean? It implies an attention in
which there is no choice whatsoever. I can't choose one image
instead of the other, then there is no ending of that image. So I
must find out what it is to be aware, in which there is no choice at
all, but only pure observation, pure seeing.
Now, what is seeing? How do I look at a tree, or a mountain, at
the hills, the moon, the flowing waters? There is not only visual
observation, but also the mind has an image about the tree, the
cloud and the river. That river has a name; it makes a sound which
is pleasant or unpleasant. I am always observing, am aware of
things, in terms of like and dislike, in terms of comparison. Is it
possible to observe, to listen to that river without any choice, any
resistance and attachment, without any verbalization? please do
this as we are talking - it is your morning-exercise!
Can I listen to that river without any sense of the past? Can I
observe these various images without any choice? - which means
without condemning any one of them, or being attached to them,
but just observe without any preference. You can't do it, can you?
Why not? Is it because my mind has become used to prejudices and
preferences? Is it because it is lazy and has not sufficient energy?

Or is it that my mind does not really want to be free of images and
wants to hold on to one particular image? So it means that the mind
refuses to see the fact that all existence is relationship, and when
there is conflict in that relationship, then life becomes a misery and
loneliness and confusion follow. Does the mind see the truth nonverbally, that where there is conflict there is no relationship?
How can one be free of the images that one has? First of all I
must find out how these images come into being, what is the
mechanism that creates them. You can see that at the moment of
actual relationship, that is when you are talking, when there are
arguments, when there are insults and brutality, if you are not
completely attentive at that moment, then the mechanism of
building an image starts. That is, when the mind is not completely
attentive at the moment of action, then the mechanism of building
images is set in motion. When you say something to me which I do
not like - or which I like - if at that moment I am not completely
attentive, then the mechanism starts. If I am attentive, aware, then
there is no building of images. When the mind is fully awake at
that actual moment, not distracted, not frightened, not rejecting
what is being said, then there is no possibility of building an image.
Try this - do it during the day.
So I have found how to prevent the building of images; but
what happens to all the images that I have gathered? You are
following the problem? Apparently this is not your problem,
because if it were the real, deep, vital problem in your life, you
would have solved it for yourself instead of sitting here waiting for
me to find the answer for you. Now, what happens to all the
images which you have collected? Do you know you have many

images hidden away in the cupboard of your mind? Can you
resolve them all, bit by bit, or would that take an infinite time?
While you are dissolving one image, you are already creating
others, so there is no ending to the gradual process of getting rid of
one image after another. So you have discovered a truth, which is,
that you cannot get rid of the images one by one; therefore the
mind that really sees the truth of this is totally aware when it is
creating an image. In that attention all the other images go away. I
wonder if you see this.
Images, then, are formed when the mind is not attentive; and
most of our minds are inattentive. Occasionally we give attention,
but for the rest of the time we are inattentive. When you are aware
of one image attentively, and you are also attentively aware of the
whole mechanism of the building of images and how it operates,
then in that attention the building of all images comes to an end;
whether they be of the past, the present or of the future. What
matters is the state of attention, not how many images you have.
Do, please, try and understand this, because it is most important. If
you can really grasp this, then you have understood completely all
the machinery of the mind.
Most of us, unfortunately, have not been able to solve our
problems; we don't know how to deal with them, so we live with
them, they become our habit and they are like impenetrable
armour. If you have a problem which has not been resolved, you
have no energy; the energy that you have is taken up by the
problem; if you have no energy, that too becomes a habit. So if you
are at all serious, if you really want to live a life in which there is
no conflict whatsoever, then you have to find out how to end a

human problem instantly, immediately; which means that you give
complete attention to the problem and that you are not seeking an
answer to it. Because if you are trying to find an answer, then you
are looking beyond the problem, whereas if you remain with the
problem and are completely attentive, then in the problem itself not beyond it - is the answer.
Let me put it differently. We all know what suffering is, both
physical and psychological, that is inwardly. One can deal with
physical pain by various remedies and also by not allowing the
memory of that pain to remain. If you are aware of the pain, and in
that very awareness you see the memory of the xxZastZ then the
pain disappears; therefore you have energy to meet the next pain,
when it comes. We all have suffered psychologically in various
ways, either with great intensity or to a lesser degree - we have all
had suffering of one kind or another. When we suffer, instinctively
we want to run away from it - through religion, through
entertainment, reading books, through anything to get away from
the suffering.
Now if the mind is attentive and does not move away from
suffering at all, then you will see that out of total attention comes
not only energy - which means passion - but also that suffering
comes to an end. In the same way, all images can end instantly
when there is no preference for any image; this is very important.
When you have no preference, you have no prejudice. Then you
are attentive, then you can look. In that observation there is not
only the understanding of the building of images, but also the
ending of all images.
So I see the importance of relationship, and there can be a

relationship without any conflict, which means love. Love is not an
image; it is not pleasure; it is not desire. Love is not something that
can be cultivated; it is not dependent on memory. Can I live a daily
life without any kind of self-concern, because the self-concern is
my major image? Can I live without that major image? Then action
does not bring loneliness, isolation and suffering.
Questioner: When one looks within and seems to experience a
deep unmotivated passion to understand, with a bit of candour one
finds that this feeling is actually a wish to experience reality. Can
the self, which is all we know, have this unmotivated passion and
see the essential difference between these two feelings?
Krishnamurti: First of all, what is the self, the "me"? Surely, that
"me" is the result of our education, of our conflicts, of our culture,
of our relationship with the rest of the world; that "me" is the result
of the propaganda which we have been subjected to for five
thousand years. It is that "me" which is attached to our furniture,
our wives or husbands and so on. It is that "me" which says "I want
to be happy. I must be successful, I have achieved". It is that "me"
which says I am a Christian, a communist or a Hindu. There are all
those terrible divisions - the "me" is all that, isn't it?
Can that "me" which is isolated, which by its very structure and
nature is limited and therefore creates division, can that "me" have
any passion at all? Obviously not. It can have the passion of
pleasure, which is something quite different from the passion live
are talking about. Only with the ending of the "me" is there
passion; it is only a mind that is free from all prejudices, opinions,
judgments and all conditioning, that can have passion, energy and
intensity, because it is able to see "what is". You agree and say

"Yes". Is that merely a verbal statement, or have you really seen
the truth of it and are free?
Questioner: Do these images we have waste our energy?
Krishnamurti: It is obvious, isn't it? If I have an image about
myself and that is in opposition to your image, there must be
conflict, therefore it must waste energy, isn't that so?
Questioner: Can a person who is free from problems have a
relationship with someone who is full of problems? (Laughter).
Krishnamurti: Well, you have answered it, haven't you? If you
are really free of problems - not just in your imagination - but
actually free of every problem that human beings have, such as
sorrow, fear, death, love and pleasure, can I have a relationship
with you if I have problems? Obviously I can't. Please listen to
this: you have no problems and I have problems, then what do I
do? Either I shun you, avoid you, or I begin to worship you. I put
you on a pedestal and say, "What an extraordinary man you are,
because you have no problems." I begin to listen to whatever you
say in the hope that you will be able to resolve my problems. And
that means I am going to destroy you with my problems. First I
pushed you away; now I accept you, worship you, which means I
will kill you with my problems.
Questioner: Is there any hope for us? (Laughter).
Krishnamurti: It all depends on you! If you are really serious, if
you are deeply interested in resolving your problems completely,
then you will have the intensity and vitality to resolve them, but it
is no use if you play with them one day and the next day forget
about them.
Questioner: What can we do to prevent others from taking

drugs?
Krishnamurti: Do you take drugs?
Questioner: No, but I drink coffee and alcohol. Isn't that the
same?
Krishnamurti: We drink coffee, we take alcohol, we smoke, and
some take drugs. Why do you take them? Coffee and tea are
stimulants, aren't they? I don't take them myself, but I know about
them. Physiologically you may need some form of stimulant; some
people do. Are alcohol and tobacco the same as taking drugs? Go
on, answer it.
Questioner: Yes.
Krishnamurti: You say taking alcohol is the same as taking
drugs.
(General disagreement.)
Krishnamurti: Don't take sides, please. One says, "No",
somebody else says "Yes". Then where are we? I am simply asking
why you take any of these things at all. Do you need a stimulant,
do you need something to pep you up, to encourage you? Please
answer this question. Do you need constant stimulation and
entertainment, must you have tea, tobacco, drugs and all the rest of
it? Why do you need them?
Questioner: To escape.
Krishnamurti: To escape, to take the easy way out. You drink a
glass of wine and you are happy, it is done quickly!
Questioner: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So you need stimulants in various forms. Are you
being stimulated now by the speaker? Questioner: Yes. (Laughter).
Krishnamurti: Please pay a little attention. You say "No" and

this gentleman says "Yes". Please investigate. Are you being
stimulated at this moment? If you are, then the speaker is just as
good as a drug. Then you depend on the speaker as you are
dependent on tea, coffee, alcohol or drugs, whatever it is. I am
asking why you depend, not whether it is right or wrong, whether
you should or should not. Why do you depend on any of these
stimulants?
Questioner: We can see what action it has on us, but we don't
need to be dependent on it.
Krishnamurti: But you are dependent! When the effect wears
off you need more stimulants, which means you are dependent. I
may take LSD one morning and get a kick out of it, and when it
lets me down I need some more; the day after tomorrow I am
dependent on it. Now I am asking why the human mind depends why does it depend on sex, on drugs, on alcohol, on any form of
outward stimulation? This is psychological, isn't it? There is a
physiological need for tea and coffee because we eat wrongly, we
live wrongly, because we overindulge and so on. But why do we
want to be stimulated psychologically? Is it because we are so poor
in ourselves? Is it because we have not the brain, not the capacity
to be something entirely different, that we depend on stimulants?
Questioner: Doesn't alcohol destroy the brain as well as drugs?
Krishnamurti: Alcohol may do it gradually, it may take a
number of years, but drugs are very dangerous because they affect
future generations, your children. So if you say, "I don't care what
happens to my grandson, I am going to take drugs", then that is the
end of the argument. But I am asking: what happens to your mind
when you depend on anything, whatever it is, whether it's tea,

coffee, sex, drugs or nationalism?
Questioner: I lose my freedom.
Krishnamurti: You say these things, but you don't live it, do
you? When you depend on anything it destroys freedom, doesn't it?
It makes you a slave - to alcohol, for instance: you must have your
drink, your dry Martini or whatever it is. So gradually your mind
becomes dull through dependency. It was established a long time
ago in India, that any man who is really religious will never touch
any of these things. But you don't care; you say, "I need
stimulation".
I once met a man who took LSD and he said that when he went
to a museum after taking it, he could see all the colours more
brightly, everything stood out more vividly, more sharply, there
was great beauty. He may see the lovely light of a sunset more
brilliantly, but his mind is gradually being destroyed and after a
year or two he becomes just a useless entity. If you think it is worth
it, that's up to you. But if you don't, then have nothing whatever to
do with it.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VII CHAPTER 5 5TH PUBLIC TALK SAANEN
27TH JULY 1971 'THOUGHT AND THE
IMMEASURABLE'
Some of us feel that the world is so chaotic that if it had been
organized by a madman it could not be worse thaii it is at this
present moment. Many feel that there must be environmental,
economic and political changes to stop wars, the pollution of the
air, and to end the material inequality of the very rich and the very
poor. Many consider that these things must be changed first, that if
there is an environmental, peripheral transformation, then man will
be capable of dealing with himself more reasonably and wisely.
I think the problem goes much deeper, is more complex, and
that merely to change things outwardly will have little effect.
Having observed the events in the world, the permissive society of
the young and the terrible hypocrisy of the older generation, an
educated and mature mind is fully aware that the problem is
profound and that it demands a totally different way of dealing
with it.
One also observes that most believe that all human endeavour
can be achieved by thought, whether outwardly going to the moon,
or inwardly transforming one's mind and heart. We have given
tremendous importance to the functioning of thought. Thought,
whether it be logical and objective, or irrational and neurotic, has
always played an extraordinarily important role throughout the
ages. Thought is measure; and in bringing about order and change
in society thought has shown itself very limited. It has apparently

not succeeded - it may have done so superficially but not
fundamentally. The whole machinery of thinking is responsible for
the present cohdition of the world; there is no denying that. We
think that thought can change not only the outward events and
happenings - the pollution, the violence and all the rest of it - but
that also by careful and skilful usage it can transform human
conditioning, the human way of action and our mode of living.
It is obvious that organized thought is necessary; that it requires
organized thought, applied objectively and sanely, to change the
environment with its pollution and to overcome poverty. The
whole technological world in which we live is based on thought
with its measurement; and thought can only function when there is
space. Thought creates its own space, as time, the distance from
here to there. On that the whole modern world is built.
Measurement, with its space, which is the very nature of
tliinking, is obviously limited, because thought is conditioned.
Thought is the response of memory, which is the past; the response
of thought when challenged is the past. And thought apparently has
not put an end to wars; on the contrary, thought has created wars, it
has bred division - religious, economic, social and so on. Thought
in itself is also the cause of fragmentation.
So one asks: what is the function of thought which is the
response of knowledge? Knowledge is always rooted in the past
and out of that thought projects the future, which is really a
modification of the activities of the present. So through its
knowledge, thought can project the future, what the world "should
be; but apparently the "should be" is never realized. Every
philosopher, every so-called religious teacher, has projected a

world of the future based upon knowledge of the past; he has
projected its opposite, or something which is a response to the past.
So thought has never united man. In fact, thought has divided man,
because it can only function in knowledge and knowledge is
measurable. So thought can never bring about a true relationship
between people.
Therefore, I am asking: what is the function of knowledge,
which is the known, the past? What is the function of the response
to that past, which is thought, in daily life? Have you ever put that
question to yourself? One lives and acts by thought; all our
calculations, our relationships, our behaviour, are based on
thought, on knowledge. That knowledge is more or less
measurable; and knowledge is always in the field of the known. So
can you and I realize the importance of knowledge yet see its
limitations and go beyond it? This is what I want to find niir
I see that if you are always functioning in the field of
knowledge, you will always be a prisoner; you will always be
limited within either expansive or narrow borders which are
measurable. Therefore the mind will be held within the frontiers of
knowledge. I am asking myself whether that knowledge, which is
experience, gathered in the last few days or through many
centuries, can free man so that he can function wholly, differently,
so that he is not always living in the past, which is knowledge. This
question has been put differently by many serious people, specially
in the religious world; the scholars, the pundits and gurus who have
talked with me have always asked whether man can go beyond
time. Action in the field of knowledge is measurable, so unless
man is free of that field, he will always be a slave. He may do all

kinds of things within that field, but he will always live within the
limitations which are time, measure and knowledge.
Please put this question to yourself. Must man always be bound
to the past? If he is, then he cannot ever be free; he will always be
conditioned. He may project an idea of freedom, of heaven, and
escape from the actual fact of time by projecting a belief, a
concept, or escape into an illusion - but it is still an illusion.
So I want to find out if man can be free of time and yet still
function in this world. Obviously there is chronological time today, tomorrow, next year and so on. If there were no
chronological time I should miss my train, so I realize that there
must be time in order to function, but that time is always
measurable. The action of time, which is knowledge, is absolutely
necessary. But if that is the only way in which I can live and
function then I am entirely bound, I am a slave. My mind observes,
looks, enquires and wants to find out if it can ever free itself from
the shackles of time. The mind rebels against the idea of being a
slave to time; being caught in this trap, it rebels against the idea
ofliving in a culture which is based on thought, time and
knowledge.
Now the mind wants to find out whether it is possible to go
beyond time. Can it enter into the immeasurable - which has its
own space - and live in that world, free of time and yet function
with time, with knowledge and all the technological achievements
which thought has brought about? This is a very important
question.
Can the mind enquire into the quality and nature of the
immeasurable? - knowing that any projection by thought, any form

of illusion, is still within the field of rime, hence of knowledge.
Therefore the mind must be entirely free from any movement
which might create illusion. It is very easy to imagine one is in a
timeless world, to have all kinds of illusions and think one has
caught God by the right hand. What is it that creates a fragmentary,
neurotic mind which breeds deception, and illusion? What makes
for such a state, and what is the factor of illusion?
One has to go into this question very carefully. First, you have
to be watchful never to deceive yourself under any circumstances,
never to be a hypocrite and have double standards - the private
standard and the public standard; saying one thing and doing
another; thinking one thing and saying something else. That
requires tremendous honesty, which means I must find out what is
the factor in the mind which brings about this deception and
hypocrisy, this double talk, the various illusions and neurotic
distortions; unless the mind is free of any distortion, it car,not
possibly enquire into the immeasurable.
What do you think is the cause of illusions? - the illusion of
grandeur, the illusion that you have achieved reality and reached
enlightenment. One must see for oneself very clearly, without
analysis, where distortion takes place; distortion is hypocrisy, it is
the use of imagination where it has no place at all. Imagination
may be in place when you are painting a picture, writing a poem or
a book, but if imagination says "That exists", then you are caught.
So I must not only find out the factor of illusion and distortion, but
be completely free of it.
I wonder if you have ever asked yourself whether the mind can
be completely free of this distorting factor which governs our every

action. The factor of distortion is thought; thought cultivates fear,
as thought cultivates pleasure. Thought says, "I must enter into that
timeless state because it promises freedom." It wants to achieve, it
wants to gain, it wants a greater experience. VVhen thought, which
is knowledge, functions rationally, objectively, sanely, it is not a
distorting factor. The major factors of distortion are fear and the
demand for pleasure through gratification, so the mind must be
completely free of fear. Can it? Don't say "Yes" or "No", you do
not know. Let's investigate - please, see the importance of this. The
factor of distortion is fear, it is the demand for pleasure,
gratification, enjoyment - not the pleasure itself, but the demand
for pleasure. All our moral and religious structure is based on this.
So I am asking myself whether the human mind can be completely
free of fear. If it cannot be free of fear then distortion takes place.
There is physical feir, the fear of darkness, the fear of the
unknown, of losing what one has, the fear of death and of not being
loved, the fear of not achieving, of not fulfilling, the fear of
loneliness and of having no relationship - the small physical fears
and the much more complex and subtle psychological fears. Can
the mind be free of all fears, not only at the conscious level but at
the deep, psychological levels? The mind must be completely
merciless to find this out, otherwise one enters a world of illusion
and distortion.
We all know physical pain through ill health and disease. Those
pains leave a memory and that memory which is thought, says: you
must not have that pain again, take great care. Thought, thinking
about the past pain, projects the future pain and therefore is afraid
of the future. Now when physical pain occurs, live with it and end

it - do not carry it over. If you do not end it instantly, then fear
comes in. That is, I have had great pain and I see the importance of
not having fear. That is my vital, intense demand, that there must
be no fear. When the pain comes you do not identify yourself with
it and carry it over, but you go through with it completely and end
it. To end that pain, you have to live with it, not say, "How can I
get out of it as quickly as possible." When you have pain, can you
live with it without self-pity and not complain? You do whatever is
necessary to end the pain - but when it has gone it is finished. You
do not carry it over as memory. It is thought that carries it over; the
pain has gone, but thought - which is the response of memory - has
established that memory and says "you must not have that pain
again". So when you have pain, is it possible not to build a memory
of it? Do you know what this means? It means to be completely
aware when you have pain, to be completely attentive, so that the
pain is not carried over as memory. Do it, if you are interested in it.
Then there are all the psychological fears which are mucli more
complex; again the complexity is brought about through thought. "I
want to be a great man and I am not" - so there is the pain of not
achieving. Or I have compared myself with somebody who I think
is superior, therefore I feel inferior and I suffer from that. All this
is the measurement of thought. And I am afraid of death and the
ending of everything I possess. There is the whole psychological
complexity of thought. Thought is always wanting to be sure and
always frightened of uncertainty, always wanting to achieve,
knowing it may fail. There is a battle between the action of thought
and thought tself. So can fear end completely?
Sitting here listening to the speaker, at this present moment, you

are not afraid; there is no fear because you are listening. And you
can't evoke fear, which would be artificial. But you can see that
when you are attached or dependent, this is based on fear. You can
see your attachments, your psychological dependency on your
wife, your husband, your books, or whatever it is. If you watch
closely you will discover that the root of that attachment is fear.
Not being able to be alone, you want companionship; feeling
inadequate, empty, you depend on somebody else. In that you see
the whole structure of fear. Being dependent and attached, can you
see the involvement of fear in it? And can you be psychologically
independent of anyone? Now comes the test. We can play with
words, with ideas, but when it comes to the actual fact, we
withdraw. When you withdraw and do not face the fact, you are not
concerned with the understanding of illusion; you would rather live
in an illusion than go beyond it. Don't be a hypocrite: you love to
live in an illusion, in deception, so face it. Then you will come
upon fear; remain with it, don't fight it. The more you fight it, the
more there is fear. But if you understand the whole nature of fear,
then, as you observe, you are not only aware of the superficial,
conscious fears, but also you penetrate deeply into the inner
recesses of your mind. Then fear completely comes to an end and
the factor of distortion ends.
If you are pursuing or demanding pleasure, that also is a factor
of distortion: "I don't like this guru, but I like that one"; "My guru
is wiser than your guru; "I will go to the remote corners of the earth
to find truth" - but truth isjust around the corner, here! When there
is a demand for pleasure, in any form, this must be a distorting
factor. Enjoyment is right, isn't it? It is beautiful to enjoy the sky,

the moon, the clouds, the hills, the shadows - there are lovely
things on earth. But the mind, thought, says, "I must have more and
more, I must repeat this pleasure tomorrow." On this demand is
based the whole habit of drink and drugs, which again is the
activity of thought. You see the mountains in the evening light, the
snow peaks and the shadows in the dark valley, you enjoy the
beauty, the loveliness of it tremendously. Then thought says, "I
must see that again tomorrow, it was so beautiful." So thought,
demanding pleasure, pursues the experience of the sunset on those
hills and sustains this memory; and the next time you see the sunset
that memory is strengthened. Can the mind see that sunset, live
with it completely at that moment and finish with it - and begin
afresh tomorrow? So that the mind is always free from the known.
There is a freedom which is not measurable. You can never say,
"I am free" - you understand? It is an abomination. All you can do
is to enquire into the function of thought and discover for yourself
if there is an action which is not measurable, which is not in the
field of the known. A mind that is constantly learning has no fear
and perhaps such a mind can then enquire into the immeasurable.
Questioner: Can one obsewe without any evaluation, without
any judgment, without any prejudice? Is that at all possible, or is it
just another trick of the mind, a deception? You see a mountain
and you recognise that it is a mountaian, not an elephant. To
differentiate in this way, surely, there must be judgment and
evaluation? Krishnamurti: You see the mountain, you recognise it
and the recognition is oaly possible when a memory of the
mountain has been established. Obviously, otherwise you can't
recognise it.

Questioner: I remember when I came to Switzerland as a small
child and I saw a mountainfor thefirst time, it was without any
remembrance. It was very beautiful.
Krishnamurti: Yes, Sir, when you see it for the first time you
don't say, "It is a mountain". Then somebody tells you that it is a
mountain and the next time you recognise it as such. Now, when
you observe, there is the whole process of recognition. You don't
confuse the mountain with a house or an elephant, it is a mountain.
Then the difficult problem arises: to observe it non-verbally. "That
is a mountain", "I like it or I don't like it", "I wish I could live up
there", and so on. It is fairly easy just to observe it, because the
mountains do not affect your life. But your husband, your wife,
your neighbour, your son or daughter, they affect you; therefore,
you cannot observe them without evaluation, without the image.
This is where the problem arises - can you look at the mountain
and at your wife or your husband, without a single image? See
what happens! If you can observe without an image, then you are
looking at them for the first time, aren't you? Then you are looking
at the earth, the stars, the mountains, or the politician, for the first
time. That means your eyes are clear, not dimmed with the burden
of past memories. That is all. Go into it. Work at it. You will find
out the enormous beauty that is in this.
Questioner: If you look at a factory that way, without being
aware of what it does to the environment, you cannot act.
Krishnamurti: On the contrary, you see that is polluting the air,
belchmg forth smoke, so you want to do something. Don't confuse
it, keep it simple. Do it, and you will,see what action comes out of
it.

Questioner: Is perception` something totally, and is it gradual or
instantaneous? Krishnamurti: Can I observe all of myself totally,
all the reactions, the fears, the enjoyments and the pursuit of
pleasure, all that, at a glance? Or do I have to do it gradually? What
do you think? If I do it little by little, look one day at one part of
myself, the next day at another part, can it be done that way?
Today I look at a fragment of myself and tomorrow at another;
what is the relationship of the first fragment to the second one?
And in the interval between the perception of the first and the
second fragment, other factors have come into being. So this
fragmentary examination, observing little by little, leads to a great
deal of complexity; in fact, it has no value. My question then is:
can I observe non-fragmentarily, totally, on the instant?
I have been conditioned to look at myself, to look at the world
fragmentarily - as a Christian, a Communist, a Hindu. I have been
brought up in this culture to look at the world fragmentarily. Being
conditioned by this culture, I cannot possibly take a total view. My
chief concern then is to be free of this culture, this education, and
not whether I can see completely or not. To free the mind from
fragmentation, not to be a Catholic or a Protestant - to wipe away
all that! I can wipe away all that instantly when I see the truth of it;
I cannot see the truth of it if I love being a Hindu, because that
gives me a certain position. I wear a turban and impress a lot of
silly people. And I take pleasure in the past, because tradition says,
"We are one of the most ancient races; that gives me great delight.
But I can only see the truth when I see the falseness of all that. The
truth is in the falseness.
Questioner: You have been using words to describe a non-

verbal state of mind. Is not this a contradiction?
Krishnamurti: The description is never the described; I can
describe the mountain, but the description is not the mountain, and
if you are caught in the description, as most people are, then you
will never see the mountain. There is no contradiction. Please be
very careful. I did not describe the immeasur. able, I said: you
cannot enquire into that - whatever it is - unless the mind
understands the whole process of thought. So I only described the
functioning of thought in action with regard to time and
knowledge; to describe the other is impossible.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VII CHAPTER 6 6TH PUBLIC TALK SAANEN
29TH JULY 1971 'THE ACTION OF WILL AND
THE ENERGY NEEDED FOR RADICAL
CHANGE'
ONE NEEDS A great deal of energy, vitality, interest to bring
about a radical change in oneself. If we are interested in outward
phenomena, we have to see what we can do with the rest of the
world in the process of changing ourselves; and also we must see
not only how to conserve energy, but how to increase it. We
dissipate enejgy endlessly, by useless talk, by having innumerable
opinions about everything, by living in a world of concepts,
formulas, and by the everlasting conflict in ourselves. I think all
this wastes energy. But beyond that, there is a much deeper cause
that dissipates the vital energy that is necessary not only to bring
about a change in ourselves, but also to penetrate very deeply
beyond the confines of our own thought.
The ancients said, control sex, hold your senses on a tight rein,
take vows so that you don't dissipate your energy: you must
concentrate your energy on God, or whatever it is. All such
disciplines are also a wastage of energy, because when you take a
vow, it is a form of resistance. It needs energy not only for a
superficial external change, but also to bring about a deep, inward
transformation or revolution. One must have an extraordinary
sense of energy which has no cause, which has no motive, which
has the capacity to be utterly quiet, and this very quietness has its
own explosive quality. We are going to go into all that.

One sees how human beings waste their energy, in quarrels, in
jealousies, in a tremendous sense of anxiety, in the everlasting
pursuit of pleasure and in the demand for it; it is fairly obvious that
this is a wastage of energy. And is it not also a wastage of energy
to have innumerable opinions and beliefs about everything? - how
another should behave, what another should do and so on. Is it not
a waste of energy to have formulas and concepts? In this culture
we are encouraged to have concepts according to which we live.
Don't you have formulas and concepts in the sense of having
images of how you should be, what should happen? - in the sense
of thought which rejects "what is" and formulates "what should
be"? All such endeavour is a waste of energy and I hope we can
proceed from there.
What is the basic reason behind dissipation of energy? Apart
from the cultural patterns that one has acquired of wasting energy,
there is a much deeper question, which is: can one function, and
carry on daily life without any form of resistance? Resistance is
will. I know you are all brought up to use will, to control, in the
sense of "you must, you must not, you should, you should not".
Will is independent of the fact. Will is the assertion of the self, of
the "me", independent of "what is". Will is desire; the
manifestation of desire is will. We function superficially, or at
great depth, in this assertion of the resistance of desire as will,
which is unrelated to the "fact" but dependent on the desire of the
"me", of the self.
Knowing what will is, I am asking: is it possible to live in this
world without the operation of will at all? Will is a form of
resistance, a form of division. "I will" against something "I will

not", "I must" against "I must not". So will is building a wall in
action against every other form of action. We only know action
either as conforming to a formula, to a concept, or as
approximating according to an ideal and acting in relationship to
that ideal, to that pattern. That is what we call action and in that
there is conflict. There is imitation of what "should be", which we
have projected as an ideal according to which we act; therefore
there is a conflict between the act and the ideal, because in that
there is always an approximation, imitation, conformity. I feel that
is a total wastage of energy and I am going to show why.
I hope we are watching our own activities, our own minds, to
see how we exercise will in action. To repeat, will is independent
of the fact, of "what is; it depends on the self, on what it wants not on "what is", but on what it wants. And that want is depending
on circumstances, on the environment, the culture and so on; it is
divorced from the fact. Therefore there is contradiction and
resistance against "what is", and that is a wastage of energy.
Action means the doing now - not tomorrow, not having acted.
Action is in the present. Can there be action without an idea,
without a formula, without a concept? - an action in which there is
no resistance as will. If there is will there is contradiction,
resistance and effort, which is a wastage of energy. So I want to
find out if there is an action without any will as the assertion of the
"me" in resistance.
You see, we are slaves to the present culture, we are the culture,
and if there is to be a different kind of action, a different kind of
life and so a different kind of culture altogether - not the counterculture, but something entirely different - one must understand this

whole question of will. Will belongs to the old culture in which is
involved ambition and drive, the whole assertion and aggression of
the "me". If there is to be a totally different way of living, one has
to understand the central issue, which is: can there be action
without formula, concept, ideal, or belief? An action based on
knowledge, which is the past, which is conditioned, is not action.
Being conditioned and dependent on the past, it must inevitably
create discord and therefore conflict. So I want to find out if there
is an action in which there is no will at all and choice does not
enter.
We said the other day, where there is confusion there must be
choice. A man who sees things very clearly (not neurotically or
obstinately) does not choose. So choice, will, resistance - the "me"
in action - a wastage of energy. Is there an action unrelated to all
this so that the mind lives in this world, functioning in the field of
knowledge and yet free to act without the impedi- ment of the
limitation of knowledge? The speaker says there is an action in
which there is no resistance, no interference of the past, no
response of the "me". That action is instantaneous because it is not
in the field of time - time being yesterday, with all the knowledge
and experience which acts today, so that the future is already
established by the past. There is an action which is instantaneous
and therefore complete, in which will does not operate at all. To
find that out the mind must learn how to observe, how to see. If the
mind sees according to a formula of what you should be, or what I
should be, then the action is of the past.
Now I am asking: is there an action which is not motivated,
which is in the present and which does not bring contradiction,

anxiety and conflict? As I said, a mind which has been trained in a
culture which believes and functions and acts with will, such a
mind obviously cannot act in the sense we are talking about,
because it is conditioned. So can the mind - your mind - see this
conditioning and be free of it so as to act differently? If my mind is
trained through education to function with will, then it cannot
possibly understand what it is to act without will. Therefore my
concern is not to find out how to act without will, but rather to find
out if my mind can be free of its conditioning, which is the
conditioning of will. That is my concern, and I see, as I look into
myself, that everything I do has a secret motive, is the outcome of
some anxiety, of some fear, of the demand for pleasure and so on.
Now can that mind free itself instantly to act differently?
So the mind must learn how to look. That, for me, is the central
problem. Can this mind, which is the result of time, of various
cultures, experiences and knowledge, look with eyes that are not
conditioned? That is, can it operate instantly, being free of its
conditioning? So I must learn to look at my conditioning without
any desire to change, to transform, to go beyond it. I must be
capableof looking at it as it is. If I want to change it, then I bring
about the action of will again. If I want to escape from it, there is
again a resistance. If I keep one part and reject others, again it
means choice. And choice, as we pointed out, is confusion. So can
I, can this mind, look without any resistance, without any choice?
Can I look at the mountains, the trees, my neighbour, my family,
the politicians, the priests, without any image? The image is the
past. So the mind must be able to look. When I look at "what is" in
myself and in the world, without resistance, then out of that

observation there is instant action which is not the result of will.
Do you understand?
I want to find out how to live and act in this world; not go
offinto a monastery, or escape to some Nirvana asserted by some
guru who promises, "If you do this, you will get that" - all that is
nonsense. Putting that aside, I want to find out how to live in this
world without any resistance, without any will. I also want to find
out what love is. So my mind which has been conditioned to the
demand of pleasure, of gratification, of satisfaction and therefore
of resistance, sees all that is not love. So what is love? You know,
to find out what is, one must deny, put aside totally what is not.
Through negation come to the positive; do not seek the positive,
but come to it by understanding what it is not. That is, if I want to
find out whilt truth is, not knowing what it is, I must be able to see
what is false. If I do not have the capacity to perceive what is false,
I cannot see what truth is. So I must find out what is false.
What is false? Everything else that thought has put together psychologically not technologically. That is, thought has put
together the "me", the self with its memories, with its aggression,
with its separativeness, with its ambitions, competitiveness,
imitation, fear and past memories; all that has been put together by
thought. And thought has put together the most extraordinary
things mechanically. So thought, as the me, which has in essence
no reality whatsoever, is the false. When the mind understands
what is false, then the truth is there. Similarly, when the mind
really enquires deeply into what is love, without saying "it is this",
"it is that", but enquires, then it must see what it is not and
completely drop it; otherwise you can't find the real. Is one capable

of doing that? To say for instance, "Love is not ambition". A mind
that is ambitious, wanting to achieve, wanting to become powerful,
that is aggressive, competitive, imitative, such a mind cannot
possibly understand what love is - we see that, don't we?
Now can the mind see the falseness of it? Can it see that a mind
that is ambitious cannot possibly love and drop it instantly because
it is false? Only when you deny the false completely, then the other
is. So can we see very clearly that a mind seeking gain, or
achievement, either in the world, or in the so-called spiritual
seeking of enlightenment, cannot love? The drive to find out, to
achieve is ambition. Therefore can the mind see the falseness of it
and completely drop it instantly? Otherwise you won't find out
"what is", and you will never find out what love is. Love is not
jealousy, is it? Love is not possessiveness, it is not dependency. Do
you see that? Do not carry it over with you to the next day but drop
it instantly. The dropping of it instantly does not depend on will. It
depends on whether you actually see the falseness of it. When you
drop that which is false, that which is not, the other is.
Now it becomes a little more difficult. Is love pleasure? Is love
fulfilment? If you really want to have a mind that has love you
have to go into it very deeply. We are asking: is love pleasure,
gratification, fulfilment? We said that the demand for pleasure is
the continuity of thought, which pursues pleasure as desire and
will, separate from "what is". We have associated love with sex,
and because there is pleasure in it we have made an extraordinary
thing of it. Sex has become the most important thing in life. We
have tied to find some deep meaning in it, a deep reality, a sense of
great union, oneness, and other transcendental things. Why has sex

such significance in our life? Probably we have nothing else;
maybe in every other field we are mechanical. There is nothing
original in ourselves, nothing creative - not "creative" in the sense
of producing pictures, songs and poems, that is a very superficial
part of what is really a sense of creativeness. As we are more or
less secondhand people, sex and pleasure have become
extraordinarily important. That is why we call it love, and behind
that mask we do all kinds of mischievous things.
So can we find out what love is? This has been a question man
has always asked. Not being able to find out this he says, "Love
God", "Love an idea", "Love the State", "Love your neighbour".
Not that you shouldn't love your neighbour, but this has become
merely a social operation; it is not the love that is always new. So
love is not the product of thought, which is pleasure. As we said:
thought is old, not free, it is the response of the past, and so love
has no real relationship with thought. As we know, most of our life
is a battle, the strain, the anxiety the guilt the despair, the immense
sense of loneliness and sorrow that is our life. That is actually
"what is" and we are unwilling to face it. When you face it without
choice and resistance, what takes place? Can you face it? - not try
to overcome fear, jealousy, this or that, but actually look at it
without any sense of wanting to change it, conquer it, control it,
just to observe it totally, and give your whole attention to it. When
you look at our daily life of travail, our daily bourgeois or nonbourgeois life, what takes place? Haven't you then tremendous
energy? Energy has been dissipated in resistance, in overcoming,
in going beyond it, trying to understand it, trying to change it. So
when you do look at this life as it is, is there not then a

transformation of "what is"? That transformation takes place only
when you have this energy in which the operation of will does not
exist at all.
You know, we like explanations, we like theories, we indulge in
speculative philosophy and we are carried away by all that which is
so obviously such a waste of time and energy. We must face what
actually is: the misery, the poverty, the pollution, the wretched
division of peoples and nations, the wars which we human beings
have created - they haven't come into existence miraculously, each
one of us is responsible for all this - we must face what actually is.
And also we must face one of the most important things in life,
which is death. That is one of the things that man avoids all the
time. Ancient as well as modern civilizations have tried to go
beyond that, to somehow conquer it, to imagine there is
immortality, a life after death - anything but face it. Can my mind
face something of which it knows absolutely nothing? Most of you,
unfortunately, if I may say so, have read so much about these
things. You have probably read what Indian philosophers and
teachers have said; or you have read other philosophers and had
your Christian training. You are full of other people's knowledge,
assertions and opinions. You are bound to be, although you may
not consciously acknowledge it, it is there in the blood because you
were brought up in this civilization and culture. And here is
something of which you know absolutely nothing. All you know is
that you are frightened of coming to an end. And that is what death
is.
Fear prevents you from looking at it, as fear has prevented you
from living without anxiety, sorrow, guilt - you know all that brutal

business. Fear has prevented you from living and fear prevents you
from looking at what death is. Fear demands comfort and so there
is the idea of reincarnation, the renewal in another life and so on.
We won't go into this because what we are concerned with is,
whether your mind can face the reality of an ending. That is what is
going to happen, whethcr you are healthy, or a cripple, or fairly
well off, anytliing cJn happen - old age, disease, or accident. Can
the mind look at this enormous unknown question? Can you look
at it as though for the first time? - having nobody to tell you what
to do, knowing that to find comfort is an escape from the fact. So
can you, as though for the first time, face something which is
inevitable?
What is the state of mind that is capable of looking at something
of which it knows absolutely nothing - except that there is organic
death? The organism comes to an end through heart failure,
through tension, through disease, and so on. But the psychological
question is: can the mind face something, realizing it knows
absolutely nothing about it, look at it, live with it and understand it
completely? Which means, can it look at it without any sense of
fear? The moment you have fear you have choice, there is will,
there is resistance, and that is a wastage of energy. The ending of
energy as the "me" is the capacity to look at death.
To face something of which I know absolutely nothing demands
great energy, doesn't it? I can only do that when there is no will, no
resistance, no choice, no wastage of energy. To face something
unknown, there must be the highest form of energy, and when
there is that total energy, is there a fear of death? Or is there a fear
of continuity? It is only when I have lived a life of resistance, will

and choice that there is fear of not being, or of not living. When the
mind is faced with the unknown, and all these things have gone,
there is tremendous energy. And when there is that supreme
energy, which is intelligence, is there death? Find out.
Questioner: Sir, this morning you have questioned what the
religions say, which prompts me to ask: how is it that I can
understand what you say on an intellectual level. It seems to be
sensible, it seems to be reasonable, and yet I lack the passion.
Krishnamurti: The questioner says: what you say makes some
sense intellectually, verbally, but somehow it does not penetrate, it
does not go very deep, it does not touch the source of things; so
that I can break through. It does not bring that sense of driving
vitality, that sense of living with it. I am afraid that is the case with
most people.
(Interruption.)
Krishnamurti: Please don't answer. Let us examine. The
gentleman says: what you say is logical, intellectually I accept it,
but I don't feel it deep in my heart so as to bring about a change, a
revolution in myself and to live a totally different kind of life. And
I say: that is the case with most of us. We go part of the way, take
the journey a little distance and then drop out. We keep up the
interest for ten minutes and the rest of the time think about
something else. You go away after the talk and carry on with your
daily life. Now why does this happen? Intellectually, verbally,
logically, you understand; but apparently it does not touch you
deeply, so that you will burn out the old, like a fire. Why doesn't
this happen? Is it lack of interest? Is it a sense of deep laziness, of
indolence? Examine it, Sir, don't answer me. If it is lack of interest,

why aren't you interested? When the house is burning - your house
- when your children are going to grow up to get killed, why aren't
you interested? Are you blind, insensitive, indifferent, callous? Or
deep down haven't you got the energy and are therefore lazy?
Examine it, don't agree or disagree. Have you become so
insensitive because you have your own problems? You want to
fulfil, you are inferior, you are superior, you are anxious, you have
a great sense of fear - there is all that; and your problems are
smothering you, therefore you are not interested in anything unless
you solve your problems first.
But your problems are the other man's problems, your problems
are the result of this culture in which you live. So what is it? Total
indifference, insensitivity, callousness? Or is it that your whole
culture and training has been intellectual, verbal? Your
philosophies are verbal, your theories are the product of
tremendously cunning brains and you have been brought up in that.
Your whole education is based on it. Is it that thought has been
given such extraordinary importance? - the clever, cunning,
capable, technological mind, the mind that can measure, construct,
fight and organize. You have been trained in that and you respond
on that level. You say, "Yes, I agree with you intellectually,
verbally, I see the logic, the sequence of it." But you cannot go
beyond it because your mind is caught in the operations of thought
which is measurement. Thought cannot measure depth or height,
but only on its own level.
So this is really an important question for everybody, because
most of us agree with all this verbally, intellectually, but somehow
the fire doesn't get lit.

Questioner: I think there is no change because the important
things are not on the intellectual level but on another plane.
Krishnamurti: That is what we said, Sir. There is no change, the
gentleman says, because psychologically, economically, socially,
in education, we are conditioned. We are the result of the culture in
which we live. And he says as long as that is not changed in us we
won't take any deep interest. So what is going to make you
interested? I am asking: why is it that though you listen to all this
logically, and I hope with a healthy mind, this does not light a fire
so that you burn with it? Please ask yourselves, find out why you
agree logically, verbally, superficially, yet it does not touch you
deeply. If your money or your sex is taken away it will touch you.
If your sense of importance is taken away, then you will struggle.
If your gods, your nationalism, your petty bourgeois life is taken
away, you will fight like cats and dogs. Which all indicates that
intellectually we are capable of anything. Technologically, going to
the moon, we live on the level of thought, but thought cannot
possibly ignite the flame which changes man. What changes man is
to face all this, to look at it and not always live on that very
superficial level.
Questioner: You said this morning that whenyou are capable of
looking at death as the absolute unknown, that includes thatyou are
also capable of looking at life as it is, and thatyou are capable of
action.
Krishnamurti: Yes, Sir. "When you are capable." The word
"capable" is a difficult word. Capacity means working, or to have
capacity for something. You can cultivate capacity. I can cultivate
the capacity to play golf or tennis, or to put machinery together.

Now we are not using the word "capacity" in the sense of time you understand? Capacity involves time, doesn't it? That is, I am
not capable now, but give me a year and I'll be capable of speaking
Italian, French or English. If you have understood capacity as time,
it is not what I mean. I mean: observe the unknown without any
fear, live with it. That does not need capacity. I said you will do it,
if you know what is false and reject that.
Questioner: Is it not a question of not knowing how to listen?
You have said that to listen is one of the hardest things to do.
Krishnamurti: Yes, it is one of the hardest things to do, to listen.
Do you mean to say that a man who is committed to social activity
and has put all his life into it, is he ever going to listen to any of
this? Or a man who says, "I have taken a vow of celibacy" - will he
listen to all this? No, Sir. Listening is quite an art.
Questioner: You were saying that the difficulty is on the
intellectual level and that we do not allow ourfeelings and our
emotions to come into our relations with other people. But I have
the impression it is exactly the contrary. I think that the trouble in
the world is caused hy uncontrolled emotions and passions,
probably born out of lack of understanding, but they are passions.
We live a violent life.
Krishnamurti: Violent, of course, that's understood. Now, do
you live an emotional life which needs conquering? Emotional,
excited, the enthusiasms of pleasure and sentiment - do you live in
that world? And when you do live in that world and when it gets
disorderly, then the intellect comes in and you begin to control it,
saying "I must not; but the intellect always dominates.
Questioner: Or it justifies.

Krishnamurti: It justifies or condemns. I may be greatly
emotional but the intellect comes along and says: look, be careful,
try to control yourself. Intellect always dominates - which is
thought - doesn't it? In my relationship with another I get angry,
irritated, emotional. Then what happens? That leads to trouble, a
quarrel takes place between two human beings. Then I try to
control it - which is thought; because it has established a pattern for
itself of what it should do, or what it should not do, saying, "I must
control". So we say, "There must be control," otherwise
relationship breaks down. Isn't all that a process of thinking, of
intellection? The intellect plays a tremendous part in our life, that
is all we are pointing out. We are not saying emotions are wrong or
right, or true or false, but thought with its measurement is always
judging, evaluating, controlling, overcoming, and therefore thought
prevents you from looking.
-- Page 366 --

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VII CHAPTER 7 7TH PUBLIC TALK SAANEN
1ST AUGUST 1971 'THOUGHT, INTELLIGENCE,
AND THE IMMEASURABLE'
WE HAVE BEEN talking about the various contradictory states of
the world, outside our skin as it were, about the tortures of the
refugees, and the horrors of war, about poverty, the religious and
national separations of people, and the economic and social
injustice. These are not merely verbal statements but actual facts of
what is going on in the world: violence, terrible disorder, hatreds
and every form of corruption. And in ourselves the same
phenomenon is going on; we are at war with ourselves, unhappy,
dissatisfied, seeking something which we don't know about,
violent, aggressive, corrupt, astonishingly miserable and lonely and
suffering a great deal. Somehow we don't seem to be able to get out
of this, to be free of these conditionings. We have tried every form
of behaviour and therapy, of religious sanctions and their pursuits,
the monastic life, a life of sacrifice, denial, suppression and blindly
seeking, going from one book to another, or from one religious
guru to another; or we try political reforms, and make revolutions.
We have tried so many things and yet somehow we don't seem to
be able to free ourselves from this terrible mess inside ourselves as
well as outwardly. We follow the latest guru who offers some
system, a panacea, some way to crawl out of our own misery, and
that again does not seem to resolve any of our problems. I think the
average person here asks: I know I am caught in the trap of
civilization, miserable, sorrowful, and leading rather a small,

narrow life. I have tried this and that, but somehow all this chaos is
still in me. What am I to do? How am I to get out of all this
confusion?
During these talks we have gone into various things: order, fear,
pain, love, death and sorrow. But at the end of these meetings most
of us are where we began, with slight peripheral changes, but at the
very root of our being our whole structure and nature more or less
remains as it was. How is all that to be really jolted, so that when
you leave this place, at least for one day, for one hour, there will be
something totally new, a life that really has significance, has
meaning, depth and width?
I don't know if you have noticed the mountains this morning the
river and the changing shadows, the pine trees dark against the blue
sky, and those extraordinary hills full of light and shade. On a
morning like this, sitting in a tent to talk about serious things seems
rather absurd, when everything about us is crying with great joy,
shouting to the heavens the beauty of the earth and the misery of
man. But since we are here, I would like to approach the whole
problem in a different way. Just listen to it and not only to the
meaning of the words, not only to the description, because the
description is never the described - as when you describe the hills,
the trees, the rivers and the shadows, if you don't see them for
yourselves, with your heart and your mind, the description has very
little meaning. It is like describing food to a hungry man; he must
have food, not just words and the smell of food.
I don't quite know how to put all this differently, but I would
like to explore - if you will do it with me - a different way of
looking at all this, to look from a totally different dimension. Not

the usual dimension of "me and you", "we and they", "my
problems", "their problems", "how to end this and how to get that",
how to become more intelligent, noble, but rather to see together if
we can observe all these phenomena from a different dimension.
Perhaps some of us are not used to that dimension, we don't know
if there is actually a different dimension; we may speculate about
it, we may imagine, but speculation and imagination are not the
fact. So as we are only dealing with facts and not with
speculations, it behoves us I think not only to listen to what the
speaker is going to say, but also to try to go beyond the words and
the explanations. It means you must also be sufficiently attentive
and interested, sufficiently aware of the meaning of a dimension
which we have probably not touched at all, to ask: can I look at
that dimension this morning, not with my eyes, but with the eyes of
objective intelligence and beauty and interest?
I do not know if you have ever thought about space. Where
there is space there is silence. Not the space created by thought, but
a space that has no frontiers at all, a space that is not measurable,
that cannot be connived at by thought, a space that is really quite
unimaginable. Because when man has space, real space, width and
depth and an immeasurable sense of extension, not of his
consciousness - which is merely another form of thought extending
itself with its measurement from a centre - but that sense of space
which is not conceived by thought, when there is that kind of space
there is absolute silence.
With the overcrowding of cities, the noise, the exploding
population, outwardly there is more and more restriction, there is
less and less space. I do not know if you have noticed in this valley

know new buildings are going up, there are more people, more and
more cars polluting the air. Outwardly there is less and less space;
if you go into any street in a crowded town you will notice this,
especially in the East. In India you see thousands of people
sleeping and living on the overcrowded pavement. And take any
big town, London, New York, or where you will, there is hardly
any space; the houses are small, people are living enclosed,
trapped, and where there is no space there is violence. We have no
space either ecologically, socially, or in our own mind; this is
partly responsible for the violence, that we have no space.
In our own minds the space we create is isolation, a world built
around ourselves. Please do observe this in yourselves and not only
because the speaker is talking about it. Our space is a space of
isolation and withdrawal. We don't want to be hurt any more, we
have been hurt when we were young and the marks of hurt remain;
so we withdraw, we resist, we build a wall around ourselves and
around those whom we think we like, or love, and that gives a very
limited space. It is like looking over the wall into another person's
garden, or into another person's mind, but the wall is still there and
in that world there is very little space. From that narrow, small,
rather shoddy space we act, we think, we love, we function, and
from that centre we try to reform the world, joining this or that
party. Or from that narrow hold, we try to find a new guru who will
teach us the latest way to enlightenment. And in our chattering
minds, crowded with knowledge, rumours and opinions, there is
hardly any space at all.
I do not know if you have noticed it, but if one has been
observant, aware of the things around one and in oneself, has not

just lived to earn money and have a bank account, this and that,
one must have seen how little space one has, how crowded it is in
ourselves. please watch it in yourself. Being isolated in that little
space, with enormous thick walls of resistance, of ideas and of
aggression, how is one to have space that is really immeasurable?
As we said the other day, thought is measurable, thought is
measure. And any form of self-improvement is measurable;
obviously, self-improvement is the most callous form of isolation.
One sees that thought cannot bring about the vast space in which
there is complete and utter silence? Thought cannot bring it,
thought can only progress, evolve, in ratio to the end it projects,
which is measurable. That space which thought creates,
imaginatively, or of necessity, can never enter a dimension in
which there is space which is not of thought. Through centuries
thought has built a space that is very limited, narrow, isolated, and
because of this very isolation, it creates division; where there is
division there is conflict, nationally, religiously, politically, in
relationship, in every way. Conflict is measurable - less conflict or
more conflict, and so on.
Now the question is: how can thought enter into the other? Or
can thought never enter it? I am the result of thought. All my
activities, logical, illogical and neurotic, or highly educated and
scientific are based on thought. "I" am the result of all that, and it
has space within the walls of resistance. How is the mind to change
that and discover something which is of a totally different
dimension? Have you understood my question? Can the two come
together? - the freedom in which there is complete silence and
therefore vast space, and the walls of resistance which thought has

created with its narrow little space. Can the two come together,
flow together? This has been the problem of man religiously when
he enquires at great depth. Can I hold on to my little ego, to my
little space, to the things that I have collected, to my knowledge,
experiences, hopes and pleasures, and move into a different
dimension where the two can operate? I want to sit on the right
hand of God and yet I want to be free of God! I want to live a life
of great delight, pleasure and beauty, and also I want to have joy
which is not measurable, which cannot be caught by thought. I
want pleasure and joy. I know the movement, the demand, the
pursuit of pleasure with all its fears, travails, sorrow, agony and
anxiety. And I also know that joy which is totally uninvited, which
thought can never capture; if it does capture it, it again becomes
pleasure and then the old routine begins. So I want to have both the things of this world and the other world.
I think this is the problem for most of us - isn't it? To have a
wonderful time in this world - why not? - and avoid all pain, all
sorrow, because I also know other moments when there is great joy
which cannot be touched, which is not corrupt. I want both, and
that is what we are seeking: to carry all our burden and yet to seek
freedom. Can I do this through will? You remember what we said
the other day about will? Will has nothing whatsoever to do with
the actual, with "what is". But will is the expression of desire as
"me". We think somehow through will we shall come upon the
other, so we say to ourselves, "I must control thought, I must
discipline thought". When the "I" says, "I must control and
discipline thought", it is thought which has separated itself as the
"I" and controls thought as something separate. It is still thought:

the "I" and the "not I". And one realises - thought being
measurable, noisy, chattering, running all over the place - that
thought has created the space of a little rat, a monkey that chases
its own tail. So one says: how is thought to become quiet? Thought
has created the technological world of chaos, of war, of national
divisions, religious separations; thought has brought about misery,
confusion and sorrow. Thought is time, so time is sorrow. And you
see all this if you have gone deeply, not at the instruction of
another, but merely by observing this in the world and in yourself.
Then the question arises: can thought be completely silent and
only function when necessary - when one has to use technical
knowledge, in the office, when one is talking and so on - and the
rest of the time be absolutely quiet? The more there is space and
silence, the more it can function logically, sanely, healthily with
knowledge. Otherwise knowledge becomes an end in itself and
brings about chaos. Do not agree with me, see it for yourself?
Thought, which is the response of memory, of knowledge,
experience and time, is the content of consciousness; thought must
function with knowledge, but it can only function with the highest
intelligence when there is space and silence - when it functions
from there.
There must be vast space and silence, because when there is that
space and silence, beauty comes, there is love. Not the beauty put
together by man, architecture, tapestries, porcelain, paintings, or
poems, but that sense of beauty, of vast space and silence. And yet
thought must act, must function. There is no living there, and then
coming down. So that is our problem - I am making it a problem so
that we can investigate together, so that both you and I discover

something in this which is totally new. Because each time one
investigates without knowing, one discovers something. But if you
investigate with knowing, then you will never discover anything.
So that is what we are doing. Can thought become silent? Can that
thought, which must function in the field of knowledge totally,
completely, objectively and sanely, can that thought end itself?
That is, can thought which is the past, which is memory, which is a
thousand yesterdays, can all that past, all that conditioning come
totally to an end? - so that there is silence, there is space, there is a
sense of extraordinary dimension.
I am asking myself and you are asking it with me: how is
thought to end and not in the very ending of it get perverted, go
offinto some imaginative state and become rather lopsided,
neurotic and vague? How is that thought, which must function with
great energy and vitality, to be at the same time completely
motionless? Have you understood my question? This has been the
problem of every serious religious man - not the man who belongs
to some sect based on organized belief and propaganda and
therefore not religious at all. Can the two operate together, can they
move together - not coalesce, not join together - but move
together? They can only move together if thought does not separate
itself as the observer and the observed.
You see, life is a movement in relationship, constantly moving
and changing. That movement can sustain itself, move freely, when
there is no division between the thinker and the thought. That is,
when thought does not divide itself as the "me" and the "not me",
as the observer, the experiencer, and the observed, the experienced;
because in that there is division and therefore conflict. When

thought sees the truth of that, then it is not seeking experience, then
it is moving in experiencing. Aren't you doing this now?
Just now I said thought with all its knowledge, which is always
accumulating, is something living; it is not a dead thing, therefore
the vast space can move together with thought. When thought
separates itself as the thinker, as the experiencer causing division
and conflict, then that experiencer, observer, thinker, becomes the
past which is stationary and therefore cannot move. The mind sees
in this examination that where there is division in thought,
movement is not possible. Where there is division the past comes
in and the past becomes stationary, the immovable centre. The
immovable centre can be modified and added to, but it is an
immovable state and therefore it has no free movement.
So my next question to myself and so to you is: does thought
see this, or is perception something entirely different from thought?
One sees division in the world, national, religious, economic,
social and all the rest of it; in this division there is conflict, that is
clear. And when there is division and fragmentation in myself,
there must be conflict. Then I am divided in myself as the observer
and the observed, the thinker and the thought, the experiencer and
the experience. That very division is created by thought, which is
the result of the past - I see the truth of this. Now my question is:
does thought see this, or does some other factor see it? Or is the
new factor intelligence and not thought? Now what is the
relationship between thought and intelligence? Do you understand
my question? I am terribly interested in this personally, you can
come with me or not. It is extraordinary to go into this.
Thought has created this division: the past, the present, the

future. Thought is time. And thought says to itself: I see this
division outwardly and inwardly, I see this division is the factor of
conflict. It is not capable to go beyond it, therefore it says: I am
where I began, I am still with my conflicts, because thought says,
"I see the truth of division and conflict." Now does thought see
that, or does a new factor of intelligence see it? If it is intelligence
that sees it, what is the relationship between thought and
intelligence? Is intelligence personal? Is intelligence the result of
book knowledge, logic, experience? Or is intelligence the freedom
from the division of thought? - the division which thought has
created. Seeing that logically and not being able to go beyond it, it
remains with it; it does not try to struggle with it or to overcome it.
Out of that comes intelligence.
You see, we are asking: what is intelligence? Can intelligence
be cultivated? Is intelligence innate? Does thought see the truth of
conflict, of division and all the rest of it, or is it the quality of mind
that sees the fact and is completely quiet with the fact? completely silent, not trying to go beyond it, to overcome it, to
change it, but is completely still with the fact. It is that stillness that
is intelligence. Intelligence is not thought. Intelligence is this
silence and is therefore totally impersonal. It does not belong to
any group, to any person, to any race, to any culture.
So my mind has found that there is a silence, not something put
together by thought, discipline, practice and all that horror, but a
seeing thought cannot possibly go beyond itself; because thought is
the result of the past and where the past is functioning it must
create division and therefore conflicts. Can one see that and remain
still with it? You know, it is like being completely still with

sorrow. When somebody dies for whom you care, whom you have
looked after, cherished, loved and been concerned with, there is the
shock of loneliness, of despair, a sense of isolation, everything falls
around you; can one remain with that sorrow not seeking
explanations and the cause, thinking, "Why should he go and not
I?" To remain completely still with it is intelligence. That
intelligence can then operate in thought, using knowledge, and that
knowledge and thought will not create division.
So the question arises: how is the mind, your mind, which is
endlessly chattering, endlessly bourgeois - caught in a trap,
struggling, seeking, following a guru and using discipline - how is
that mind to be completely still?
Harmony is stillness. There is harmony between the body, the
heart and the mind, complete harmony, not discord. That means the
body must not be imposed upon, not disciplined by the mind.
When it likes a certain kind of food, or tobacco, or drugs and the
excitement of all that, to be controlled by the mind is an
imposition. Whereas the body has its own intelligence when it is
sensitive, alive and not spoilt; it has its own intelligence. One must
have such a body, which is alive, active, not drugged. And also one
must have a heart - not excitement, not sentiment, not emotion, not
enthusiasm, but that sense of fulness, of depth, quality, vigour, that
can only be when there is love. And one must have a mind that has
immense space. Then there is harmony.
Now how is the mind to come upon this? I am sure you are all
asking this, perhaps not whilst you are sitting here, but when you
go home, when you walk, you will ask: how can one have this
sense of complete integrity, of unity of body, heart and mind

without any sense of distortion, division or fragmentation? How do
you think you can have it? You see the fact of this, don't you? You
see the truth ofit, that you must have complete harmony in
yourself, in the mind, the heart and the body. It is like having a
clear window, without any scratch, unsullied; then, as you look out
through the window you can see things without any distortion.
How can you have that?
Now, who sees this truth? Who sees the truth that there must be
this complete harmony? As we said, when there is harmony there is
silence. When the mind, the heart and the organism are completely
in harmony there is silence; but when one of the three becomes
distorted, there is noise. Who sees this fact? Do you see it as an
idea, as a theory, as something you "should have"? If you do, then
it is all the function of thought. Then you will say: tell me what
kind of system I must practise to get this, I will renounce, I will
discipline - all that is the activity of thought. But when you see the
truth of this - the truth, not what "should be" - when you see that is
the fact, then it is intelligence that sees it. Therefore it is
intelligence that will function and bring about this state.
Thought is of time, intelligence is not of time. Intelligence is
immeasurable - not the scientific intelligence, not the intelligence
of a technician, or of a housewife, or of a man who knows a great
deal. Those are all within the field of thought and knowledge. It is
only when the mind is completely still - and it can be still, you
don't have to practise or control, it can be completely still - then
there is harmony, there is vast space and silence. And only then the
Immeasurable is.
Questioner: I have been listening to you for fifty years. You

have said one has to die every moment. This is more real to me
now than it has ever been.
Krishnamurti:I understand, Sir. Must you listen to the speaker
for fifty years and at the end of it you understand what he says?
Does it take time? Or do you see the beauty of something instantly
and therefore it is? Now why do you and others take time over all
this? Why must you have many years to understand a very simple
thing? And it is very simple, I assure you. It only becomes complex
in explanation, but the fact is extraordinarily simple. Why doesn't
one see the simplicity and the truth and the beauty ofit instantly and then the whole phenomenon of life changes? Why? Is it
because we are so heavily conditioned? And if you are so heavily
conditioned, can't you see that conditioning instantly, or must you
peel it off like an onion, layer after layer? Is it that one is lazy,
indolent, indifferent, caught in one's own problem? If you are
caught in one problem, that problem is not separate from the rest of
the problems, they are all interrelated. If you take one problem
whether it is sex, relationship, or loneliness, whatever it is - go to
the very end of it. But because you can't do it, you have to listen to
somebody for fifty years! Are you going to say it takes you fifty
years to look at those mountains?
Questioner: I would like to know about Hatha Yoga. I know
many people who practise it but they betray themselves; they live
obviously in imagination.
Krishnamurti: I was told that Hatha Yoga and all the
complications of it was invented about three thousand years ago. I
was told this by a man who had studied the whole thing very
carefully. At that time the rulers of the land had to keep their brains

and their thoughts very clear and so they chewed some kind of leaf
from the Himalayan mountains. As time went on the plant died out,
and so they had to invent a method by which the various glands in
the human system could be kept healthy and vigorous. So they
invented Yoga exercises to keep the body healthy and thereby to
have a very active, clear mind. The practice of certain exercises asanas and so on - does keep the glands healthy and active. They
also found that the right kind of breathing helps - not to achieve
enlightenment, but to keep the mind, the brain cells, supplied with
sufficient air, so that they function well. Then all the exploiters
came along and said: if you do all these things then you will have a
quiet, silent mind. Their silence is the silence of thought, which is
corruption and therefore death. They said: this way you will
awaken various centres and you will experience enlightenment. Of
course our minds are so eager, so greedy, wanting more
experiences, wanting to be better than somebody else, better
looking, to have a better body, so we full into that trap. The
speaker does various exercises, about two hours a day; don't copy
him, you know nothing about it! So long as one has imagination,
which is the function of thought, do what you will, the mind can
never be quiet, peaceful, with a sense of great inward beauty and
sufficiency.
Questioner: In this harmonious, integrated state, when the
mindfunctions strictly in a technological way, is there then this
separation of the observer and the observed?
Krishnamurti: I understand the question. What do you think?
When there is complete harmony - real, not imaginary harmony when the body, the heart and the mind are completely harmonious

and integrated, when there is that sense of intelligence which is
harmony, and that intelligence is using thought, then will there be
the division of the observer and the observed? Obviously not.
When there is no harmony there is fragmentation, then thought
creates the division as the "me" and the "not me", the observer and
the observed. This is so simple.
Questioner: You said inyour second talk that one should be
aware not only when awake but also during sleep.
Krishnamurti: Is there an awareness when you are asleep as
well as when you are awake? Do you understand the question?
That is, during the day one is superficially or deeply aware of
everything that is going on inwardly; one is aware of all the
movements of thought, the division, the conflict, the misery, the
loneliness, one's demand for pleasure, the pursuit of ambition,
greed, anxiety, one is aware of the whole of that. When you are so
aware during the day, does that awareness continue during the
night in the form of dreams? Or are there no dreams but only an
awareness?
Please listen to this: am I, are you, aware during the day of
every movement of thought? Be honest, be simple: you are not.
You are aware in patches. I am aware for two minutes, then there is
a great blank and then again a few minutes, or half an hour later, I
realize I have forgotten myself and pick it up again. There are gaps
in our awareness - we are never aware continuously and we think
we ought to be aware all the time. Now first of all, there are great
spaces between awareness, aren't there? There is awareness, then
unawareness, then awareness and so on, during the day. Which is
important? To be continuously aware? Or to be aware for short

periods? What is one to do with the long periods when one is not
aware? Amongst those three, what do you think is important? I
know what is important for me. I am not bothered about being
aware for a short period, or wanting to have awareness
continuously. I am only concerned with when I am not aware,
when I am inattentive. I say I am very interested in why I am
inattentive, and what I am to do about that inattention, that
unawareness. That is my problem - not to have constant awareness.
You would go crazy unless you had really gone into this very, very
deeply. So my concern is: why am I inattentive and what happens
in that period of inattention?
I know what happens when I am aware. When I am aware
nothing happens. I am alive, moving, living, vital; in that nothing
can happen because there is no choice for something to happen.
Now, when I am inattentive, not aware, then things happen. Then I
say things which are not true, then I am nervous, anxious, caught, I
fall back into my despair. So why does this happen? Are you
getting my point? Is that what you are doing? Or are you concerned
with being totally aware and trying, practising to be aware all the
time?
I see I am not aware, and I am going to watch what happens in
that state when I am not aware. To be aware that I am not aware is
awareness. I know when I am aware; when there is an awareness it
is something entirely different. And I know when I am not aware, I
get nervous, I twitch my hands, I do all kinds of stupid things.
When there is attention in that unawareness the whole thing is
over. When at that moment of unawareness I am aware that I am
not aware, then it is finished; because then I don't have to struggle

nor say, "I must be aware all the time, please tell me a method to
be aware, I must practise and so on" - becoming more and more
stupid. So you see when there is no awareness and I know I am not
aware, then the whole movement changes.
Now, what happens during sleep? Is there an awareness when
you are asleep? Ifyou are aware during the day-time in patches,
then that continues while you are asleep - obviously. But when you
are aware, and also aware that you are inattentive, a totally
different movement takes place. Then when you sleep there is an
awareness of complete quietness. The mind is aware of itself. I
won't go into all this, it is not a mystery, it is not something that is
extraordinary. You see, when the mind is deeply aware during the
day, that awareness in depth brings about a quality of mind during
sleep that is absolutely quiet. During the day you have observed,
you have been aware, either in patches, or you have been aware of
your inattention; then as you go through the day the activity of the
brain has established order when you sleep. The brain demands
order, even if that order is in some neurotic belief, in nationalism,
or in this or that - but in that it finds an order which inevitably
brings about disorder. But when you are aware during the day, and
aware of your unawareness, then at the end of the day there is
order; then the brain does not have to struggle during the night to
bring about order. Therefore the brain becomes rested, it is quiet.
And the next morning the brain is extraordinarily alive, not a dead,
corrupt, drugged thing.
-- Page 383 --

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VIII CHAPTER 1 1ST PUBLIC DIALOGUE
SAANEN 4TH AUGUST 1971 'THE
FRAGMENTATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS'
Krishnamurti: Could we in these dialogues work out one problem
each morning, go into it thoroughly, so that we really understand
it? This is a friendly conversation between us in which we can go
into a problem together and see if we cannot resolve the problem
that we take each morning. A dialogue is different from a
dialectical argument; it is not seeking truth through opinion, or
discussion, which means reasoning, logic, argument; that will not
lead us very far. Can we take one problem this morning and go into
it completely, not deviating from it but go into it step by step, in
detail, hesitatingly, not offering an opinion - because then it is your
opinion, your argument, against somebody else's - and also not
indulging in ideologies, not quoting others, but take a problem that
is vital to each one of us and work it out together? That would be
worthwhile, I feel. Shall we do that?
Questioner (1): Could we discuss order?
Questioner (2): Ifind that in spite of allyou have said I am still
left with my inner emptiness. The urge to escapefrom it prevents
mefrom looking - I am alwoys escaping.
Questioner (3): I wonder if the method we use together really
makes it possiblefor us to make a radical and lasting
transformation? Because this method is on the conscious level and
theforces which bind us are on the unconscious level. How can we
really be liberated from the unconscious conditioning and motives?

For instance, if I moy give an example, I know lots ofpeople who
have been followingyou for many years, they don't judge from the
point of view of nationalities any more, but they judge the hippies,
which is the same thing.
Questioner (4): I have a problem in understanding awareness.
My mind is aware when it is going through something, it labels it,
and then I become separate from the experience. When I become
aware, there is a separation between the obseved and the observer.
Questioner (5): What is it to look at life completely?
Questioner (6) :You said, "I am the world and the world is me."
What are the simple reasonsfor that assertion?
Krishnamurti: Which one of these problems shall we take this
morning, so that when you and I leave the tent we have really
understood it?
Questioner: Do you look at life as good or evil?
Krishnamurti: How do you actually look at life? Don't pretend.
Don't let us become theoretical, hypothetical, and thereby slightly
dishonest. Do you look at life as a whole, or do you look at life in
fragments? - all broken up. Is it possible to look at this whole
movement as a unitary process? And can I, who have been brought
up in a certain culture which conditions me, consciously or
unconsciously, to look at God and the Devil - the physical and the
non-physical - can I consider this whole movement oflife, or do I
break it up? And when you do break it up then, out of that, comes
disorder. Now, how do you actually look at life?
Questioner: In most of the discussions I have heard you start
with the premise of disorder, not from the point of view of order.
Krishnamurti: I don't posit order, I start with disorder. We are in

disorder, that is clear. There is war, the division of nationalities,
there is man and woman fighting each other. We are at war with
each other and in ourselves, that is disorder. This is the fact. It
would be absurd to posit order - there is no order! Questioner: Is
there not order in natural life?
Krishnamurti: probably there is, in nature. But that is not my
question. Our question is: can you and I look at this whole
phenomenon of existence as one unitary movement, not broken up
as the conscious and the unconscious?
Questioner: But that would be order.
Krishnamurti: We are discussing that, I don't know where it is
going to lead us. We are trying to find out through conversation
whether our minds are capable of looking at life as a whole, as one
unitary movement and therefore without ontradiction.
Questioner: But isn't the definition of the unconscious that I am
unable to look at it?
Krishnamurti: We must go into this slowly. Now suppose I
cannot look at life as a whole. Am I aware that I look at life
fragmentarily? Let us begin with that. Are you aware, do you know
that you divide life?
Questioner (1): No.
Questioner (2): Is not "life as a whole" an abstract concept?
Krishnamurti: If we posit life as a unitary process, as an idea,
then it is a concept. But if we realize that we live in fragments and
ask whether that fragmentary division can be changed, then we
may find out the other.
Questioner: It appears to me that I have to find out what I am
first, before I can begin to change. I don't like hippies, and that's

what I am! Possibly I can change it, if I first become what I am.
Krishnamurti: Look, Sir, we are not talking about change. This
morning we are trying to go into the question: how do I consider
life?
Questioner: If I am fragmented I can't see it as a whole.
Krishnamurti: That's it. Are we fragmented? Let's begin with
that. Questioner: Maybe fragmentation is not at the conscious
level, as you said, as an artist, a scientist, a priest. The
fragmentation is in the , unconscious.
Krishnamurti; First of all be absolutely sure that you have
discarded the superficial; that you are no longer caught in the
various religioG and nationalistic fragmentary approaches to life.
Be quite sure you have discarded all that completely; it is one of
the most difficult things to do. But let's go deeper.
Questioner: If these dioisions do exist on the conscious level,
isn't that a.. fragmentation in itself, to discard them?
Krishnamurti: We'll come to that. By going into the conscious
and seeing how fragmentary it is, we will naturally come upon the
other. Then they will come together, because we have divided life
as the conscious and the unconscious, the hidden, and the open.
That is the psychoanalytical, the psychological point of view. To
me personally that does not exist. I don't divide into conscious and
unconscious. But apparently for most of us there is this division.
Now, how are you going to examine the unconscious? You have
said there is this division between the conscious and the
unconscious, and one may be superficially free of the divisions that
culture has brought about. How are you going to examine the
unconscious with all its fragmentations?

Questioner (1): Hadn't we better examine whether there is a
conscious and an unconscious, andfind out whether or not they
exist?
Questioner (2): What is the definition of the unconscious?
Krishnamurti:Apparently the definition of the unconscious is it
is what we don't know about. We think we know what superficial
consciousness is, but we don't know what the unconscious is. Just
listen to what that gentleman said: we have made this division but
is that a fact?
Questioner: If the unconscious is not afact, after one talk at
Saanen we would be liberated!
Krishnamurti:There is the conscious and the unconscious. I
don't say the division exists, but that's what we have taken. Do you
know your conscious mind - what you think, how you think, why
you think? Are you conscious of what you are doing and what you
are not doing? You think you understand the conscious but you
may not actually understand it. Which is the fact? Do you really
know the conscious? Do you know the content of the conscious
mind?
Questioner: Isn't the conscious mind, what we understand, by
definition?
Krishnamurti: You may understand one thing and you may not
understand another. You may understand one part of the content of
the conscious and another part you may not know anything about
at all. So do you know the content of your conscious mind?
Questioner: If we knew it there wouldn't be this chaos in the
world.
Krishnamurti: Of course, naturally.

Questioner: But we don't know it.
Krishnamurti: That's my point. We think we know it. We think
we know the operations of the conscious mind, because there is a
set of habits: going to the office, doing this and that. And we think
we understand the content of the superficial mind. But I question it,
and I also question very much whether the unconscious can ever be
investigated by the conscious. If I don't know the content of the
conscious mind, how can I examine the unconscious with its
content? So there must be a different approach to it altogether.
Questioner (1): How do we know the unconscious exists?
Questioner (2): By its manifestations.
Krishnamurti: You say, By its manifestations." That is,
consciously you may be doing something, but unconsciously the
motive may be entirely different from the conscious urge.
Questioner: Negative action.
Krishnamurti: Of course. Please let us try to understand each
other. If the content of the conscious cannot be known completely,
how can that conscious, which is superficial, which does not know
itself, examine the unconscious with all its hidden content? Now
you have only one means of examination, which is: to look at the
unconscious consciously. Please see the importance of this.
Questioner: Isn't it true that for any inward conscious
manifestation there is also a parallel outward manifestation?
Krishnamurti: Obviously. Can we put it this way: do I know the
content of my consciousness? Am I aware of it, do I understand it,
have I observed without prejudice, without any kind of formula?
Questioner: I think the problem is deeper. What you know, what
you are aware of, that is your conscious, everything you are not

aware of, don't know about, that is your unconscious.
Krishnamurti: I understand; that is what he said just now. Please
give a few minutes thought to what somebody else has said, which
is: if I don't know the content of my superficial consciousness, can
that consciousness, which is not complete in the understanding of
its superficiality, examine the unconscious? That is what you are
doing now, aren't you? You are trying to observe the unconscious
consciously. No?
Questioner (1): This is impossible. We cannot do it.
Questioner (2): There is no frontier between consciousness and
the unconscious.
Krishnamurti: Therefore what will you do? Don't indulge in
theories. Look, I have been brought up with a highly traditional
Brahmanical background; the tradition of it is ruthless. From
morning until night you are told what to do, what not to do, what to
think. From the moment you are born you are conditioned. It is
done consciously every day, by the Temple, by the mother, by the
father, by the environment, by the culture which is Brahmanic.
Then you move to another conditioning, and again to another
conditioning. There is conditioning after conditioning. All this is
laid upon you by society, by civilization, by accident, or by
intention. Now, how are you going to divide this and that? - they
are all interrelated. I may reject the Brahmanical tradition very
quickly, or I may not, or I may think I have done it, yet still be
caught in it. How am I to understand this whole content?
Questioner: I am that content.
Krishnamurti: Of course, consciousness is its content! Please
see that. My consciousness is made up of the Brahmanical

tradition, the theosophical tradition, the World Teacher - all that;
the content of all this consciousness is that. Now can I look at this
whole content as one, or do I have to look at it fragmentarily?
Wait, see the difficulty first. Is there a content so deep down that I
don't know it? Can I forever only know the superficial content?
That is the problem. Now how am I to uncondition the mind which
has such a content?
Questioner: You said thatyou were taking the example ofa
Brahmanical conditioning, which is still looking at itfragmentarily.
Butyour relationship with a father, or a mother, or with somebody
who was awfully nervous, or who frustratedyou - this would be
even more important. If you ask, "How do I uncondition the mind,
or how do I uncondition myself", I would say: how do I change?
Krishnamurti: It is the same thing, Sir.
Questioner: For instance, I believe that first you must become
what you are.
Krishnamurti: What are you? You are all that conditioning. Are
you aware of all your conditioning? Before we talk about change,
first we must ask: am I aware of my conditioning? Not only
superficially but in the deep down layers. As the gentleman pointed
out, I may be caught in a Christian, Communist, or Brahmanical
tradition; but also I have lived in a family where the mother may
have been brutal or nervous. Fortunately in the family in which this
person grew up, there were thirteen children and nobody cared!
Questioner: I have the feeling that I am unconditioning myself
by listening toyou. Krishnamurti:That's it, just listen, that is what I
want to get at. Let's move!
Questioner: Attention must uncondition the mind.

Krishnamurti: No, Madam. That is speculation. Just let us
follow this please. I am all my content: the content is my
consciousness, the content is experience, knowledge, tradition,
upbringing, the nervous father, the brutal or the nagging mother.
All that is the content which is "me". Now am I aware of this
content? Don't shrug your shoulders and say "I don't know;
otherwise you can't move forwards. If you are not aware - I am
afraid you are not, if I may point out - then how do we proceed?
Questioner: The mind is aware that it is conditioned. It sees the
conditioning.
Krishnamurti: I understand. Look, I can see part of my
conditioning; I can see I am conditioned as a Communist or a
Muslim, but there are other parts of this. Can I investigate
consciously the various fragments which compose the "me", the
content of my consciousness? Can I consciously look at all this?
Questioner: But we are not separate from it.
Krishnamurti: I understand. How am I to look at the various
contents of my consciousness? Or is that a totally wrong process?
Questioner: It must be.
Krishnamurti: We are going to find out, don't say, "It must be."
Questioner: I don't see how one can envisage all of these parts.
It seems that if one can hold oneself to what one is seeing actually
around one in theforeground of one's sight, withoutjudgment or
preconception as to how one should look at it, then one begins to
see even the subconscious.
Krishnamurti: I understand. But you have not yet answered my
question, which is: can you look at the content of your
consciousness? - you being part of that content. If you cannot know

the content of your consciousness, how can you say, "I am right",
or "I am wrong", "I loathe this or that", "This is good", or "That is
bad", "The hippies are nice", "The hippies are not nice"? You are
not in a position to judge at all. So, can you know the content of
your own consciousness?
Questioner: What is aware of the conditioning? That is the
important thing, surely.
Krishnamurti: So let's go on a little bit. Does one realize one's
consciousness is its content? Do you understand my statement?
The content makes up consciousness. So consciousness is not
separate from its content; the content is consciousness. Is that
absolutely clear? Now, what do you do then? The fact is, the
content makes up your consciousness; being a Communist, a
Christian, a Buddhist, the influence of the father, the mother, the
pressures of civilization, whatever it is, all that is the content. Do
you say, "That is a fact"? Begin with that. Keep to it. Then what do
you do?
Questioner: I see that the usual process of my trying to act on
what I see, is in itself a fragmentation; and when that is seen
clearly, I stop acting on what I see.
Krishnamurti: No, you are missing my point.
Questioner: We cannot do anything - there is nothing to be
done.
Krishnamurti:Wait: don't move from there.
Questioner: This process must lead to the world order.
Krishnamurti: That's just it. The world order, or disorder, is the
content of my consciousness, which is in disorder. Therefore I said,
"I am the world, the world is me." The "me" is made up of all the

different parts of the content, and so is the world. The fact is, the
content of my consciousness is consciousness. How do I proceed
from there to unravel the various contents, examine them, throw
out some, keep some. Who is the entity that is examining? That
entity, which seems separate, is part of my consciousness, which is
the result of the culture in which I have been brought up. The
second fact is: if there is an entity which examines each fragment
of that content, then that examiner is part of the content, and that
examiner has separated himself from the content for various
psychological reasons of security, safety, protection; and also it is
part of the culture. So on examination I find that I am playing a
trick I am deceiving myself. Do you see this?
The division as the examiner, as the observer, separating
himself from the content, analysing, rejecting or keeping - all that
is also the result of the content. Do I see this very clearly? If I do,
then what is action? I am faced with this problem. I am
tremendously conditioned, and part of this conditioning is the
desire to be secure. A child needs to be secure; the brain needs to
be completely secure so as to function healthily. But that brain,
wanting to be secure, may find security in some neurotic belief or
in some neurotic action. So it has found security in tradition and
holds on to it. And it has found security in this division as the
observer and the observed, because that is part of the tradition;
because if I reject the observer I am lost!
So I am now faced with the fact that division as the observer
and the observed, or whatever movement I make, is part of the
content. Are you clear on this? Then what is there to be done? We
are not discussing the conscious or the unconscious, because it is

part of this. We say the conscious mind observes at a certain level
but there are deeper motives, deeper intentions, deeper vitalities,
and the whole of that is the content of my consciousness, which is
the world consciousness.
So what am I to do? My mind realizes that it must be free from
conditioning, otherwise I am a slave to that; I see there will be
wars, there will be antagonism, there will be division. So the mind,
being intelligent, says it must uncondition itself at any price. How
is this to be done without the division as the analyser and the
analysed? - knowing the content is consciousness, and that any
effort I make to get out of it is still part of that content. Do you
understand? Then what is one to do, faced with this?
Questioner: Either accept the world as it is, or totally reject it we can't accept it as it is. Krishnamurti: Who are you to accept it?
Why should you accept it or reject it? It is a fact. There is the sun.
Do you accept it or reject it? It is there! You are faced with this and
if you reject it, who is the person who is rejecting it? The person is
part of that consciousness he is rejecting; only it is a part that does
not suit him. And if he accepts, he will accept the part that suits
him.
Questioner: But it is even more difficult than that; because ifyou
are only conditioned to be a Hindu,you might not even know it. To
go back to what you said bef ore about a neurotic pattern: one may
be fixed in a neurotic pattern and not know it.
Krishnamurti:That's why I am going to show you something,
Sir.
Questioner: How can I reject it?
Krishnamurti: You can't reject anything. There it is! Now what

is the action that takes place when you observe that you can't do
anything?
Questioner: You stop. You feel that all this consciousness is not
really it, andyou might be a monster. And getting thefeeling
thatyou are this, you stop. But the process goes on, you can't help
it.
Krishnamurti: No. The process goes on only when I have not
understood the content of my consciousness: whether it is neurotic,
or not, whether it is homosexual or not - the content - all that is
implied. And if I choose one part and hold on to it, that is the very
essence of neurosis. So any action on my part - which is part of the
content of my consciousness - cannot be unconditioned; it cannot
be done that way.
Then what am I to do? Have you got it? I will not reject or
accept it. That is a fact.
Questioner: Everything you do only strengthens the division.
Krishnamurti: Therefore, what do you do?
Questioner: You can't do any thing. Krishnamurti: Wait, you are
too quick! You don't know what it means not to do a thing!
Questioner: May Ijust say what Freud said: you must bring what
is the unconscious into the conscious.
Krishnamurti: I am not interested in what Freud says.
Questioner: I am.
Krishnamurti: Why?
Questioner: Because it is a fact. You can see it in nature.
Krishnamurti:Are you quoting Freud, or have you observed it
yourself? Is it your own experience when you say that the
unconscious pops up and acts, or that the unconscious prevents

action? You are still thinking in terms of division - the conscious
and the unconscious. I am not thinking in those terms at all.
Questioner: There isn't really a division.
Krishnamurti: But you still say: the unconscious pops up.
Questioner: It'sjust a word - like "will".
Krishnamurti: Oh no, when we use the word "unconscious" we
are using it with the definite meaning that there is something which
is not conscious. To me that is a statement of fragmentation. So if
you know that you are fragmented that way, why do you hold on to
it?
Questioner: Our unconscious works!
Krishnamurti: Of course it does. Someone says he is
heterosexual; deep down he is probably homosexual. We are
always contradicting ourselves, always hypocrites. So I say all this
is part of consciousness: tradition, Freud, holding on to it, not
holding on to it, dislike of the hippies and liking the squares - it is
all the same. So I am saying to you, the whole of the content is my
consciousness. I will not choose one part, and not the other; not
hold on to one part because that pleases me, or because I am
conditioned that way. Questioner: But when you say "the religious
mind" - you talk about that...
Krishnamurti: I am afraid I do.
Questioner: ...you also make a division.
Krishnamurti:Ah, no, I say when there is no division of any
kind, not only superficially, but in the content of consciousness
itself, as the observer and the observed, when there is nothing of
that, then there is the quality of the religious mind. That has been
made very clear.

Now please just listen. When we say the content makes up
consciousness - whether Freudian philosophy, or your particular
experience - everything is included in that. The poor man in India
has never heard of Freud, or Christ, but the man who has been
brought up with the mythology of Christ, says: that is a fact. And
the poor villager with his God, says: that is a fact. Both are the
content of one's consciousness. Surely Sir?
Questioner: It is not clear.
Krishnamurti:You see, you refuse to let go of the particular
fragment to which you are holding on. This is what I have to fight
when I go to India, because for centuries they have been brought
up with the idea that there is an Atman and Brahman, God. And
they believe most fundamentally that enlightenment is only
possible when these two come together. And I say it is nonsense,
both are invented by thought.
Now I have come to this point: I see for myself that any
movement within that content is still part of the content. I know it
completely, it is as clear as that sunshine, it is an absolute fact.
Then I say to myself: now, how is the mind to free itself from its
conditioning?
Questioner: You will have to go beyond the conditioning.
Krishnamurti: No, to "go beyond" means still being part of it.
Questioner: But you can go beyondyourself when you are
listening.
Krishnamurti: Yes, quite right. Questioner: Because Ifeel that
you have lost your conditioning, I am going to listen to you,
actually listen.
Krishnamurti: I understand, Sir. You don't know me, please

don't say, "you are unconditioned; you don't know what it means,
so please don't judge.
Questioner: We don't want to get rid of our conditioning.
Krishnamurti: Keep it and live with it, be in turmoil, be in
misery, have wars! If you like it, hold on to it. And that is what is
happening! The Arab holds on to his conditioning and that is why
he is fighting the Israelis. And the Israelis hold on to theirs. That is
the world. I have my particular anchor and won't let go. So
knowing all this, what is the mind to do?
Questioner: I become very quiet. I don't do anything.
Krishnamurti:Do you follow the statement? He says: when I am
faced with this fact that I am wholly conditioned, I become silent. I
can play tricks upon myself and say I am unconditioning myself which is part of my training, which is part of the content. He says,
"I become silent". Is that so?
Questioner: I can't help bringing in the "I".
Krishnamurti: That's just it. He means really that it is a means of
saying "I". Now what happens when you are faced with something
about which you can't do anything? Until now you have thought,
because of your conditioning, that you could do something, that
you could change, that you could manipulate, that you could alter
things; but it is still part of the same field, moving from one corner
of the field to another. When you realize that any movement within
that field is a conditioned movement, what takes place? When the
Arab and the Israeli say: look, I am conditioned and you are
conditioned, what takes place? Go on, Sir, what takes place?
Questioner: Then it is possible to live.
Krishnamurti:I realize I am totally conditioned and that any

tricks I can play upon myself are part of my conditioning.
Changing from being a Catholic to becoming a Hindu, from being
a Hindu to Communism, then back to Zen, and from Zen to
Krishnamurti and so on (Laughter) - it is part of my conditioning, it
is part of this whole content. What happens when I realize this?
Questioner: The process stops itself.
Krishnamurti: Has it stopped with you? Don't theorize!
Questioner: It is a fact. It stops by itself.
Krishnamurti: It is much more complex than that. You are too
quick, you are not going with it. You want a result.
Questioner: The mind that sees this, is not the same mind that
started the enquiry.
Krishnamurti: That's it. Go slowly, Sir. What has taken place to
a mind that started enquiring into its content and has discovered the
extraordinary divisions, the contradictions, the fragmentation, the
assertions, the aggression, all that; what happens to such a mind?
Questioner: It becomes very clear. It wins space, it is in another
state.
Krishnamurti: Then Sir, I will put you a different question.
What is your action in daily life - notjust in a crisis - when you
realize this fact?
Questioner: Maybe we don't realize this.
Krishnamurti: That's my point. Either you realize this as a fact,
and that fact fundamentally changes the whole structure of your
consciousness, or you don't realize it. If you don't realize it - as
apparently you don't - and merely say, "I understand", it means
nothing. When you are confronted with this fact, what is your
action in daily life? Relate the two, then you will get the answer.

That is: I realize that I am conditioned as a Hindu. I realize that I
have been brought up in peculiar circumstances - the world teacher
- the devotion, candles, worship, all that; facing the world,
property, money, position, prestige - and I see all that is part of the
content, part of "me', What is the relationship of that perception to
my daily life? Unless I relate it, it remains verbal, theoretical,
nonsensical. So I must relate it. If you can't answer it, then you
have not realized it, then you are playing with words.
Questioner: It appears to me that every timeyou ask a question,
there is a problem of everyone trying to find the answer. In the
question should be the realization thatyou can't answer.
Krishnamurti: Of Course not, Sir. I am asking it because you
have to ask that question.
Questioner: That's right. It's the person who asks the question
who always looks for the answer.
Krishnamurti: That is what I am saying. Whether you are
attached to one neurosis or another, when you realize all this,
conditioning, what does that realization do to your daily activities?
Questioner: Does all effort on the part of the self cease?
Krishnamurti: You are going to find out. When you say, "I have
understood it", if there is a division between that realization and
your daily action, then there is conflict. That conflict is disorder, in
which we live, both the world and you and another. So what takes
place when there is a real perception of the truth, like "fire burns",
"poison kills"? When you realize this fact as vitally as that, then
what is your action in that realization in your daily life?
Questioner: This realization keeps me aware in daily life - that
is all that is needed.

Krishnamurti: Oh no, Madam. It is nothing of the kind.
Questioner: It must totally change my way of living.
Krishnamurti: Find out, Sir. Of course it does. I am not being
patronizing, I am just asking you: do you realize it, in the sense
that when you have toothache there is an absolute realization of
pain - you do something about it? You don't theorize about it, you
go to the nearest drugstore, or to the dentist, there is action. In the
same way, when the mind realizes totally that you are conditioned,
that your consciousness is its content - and that any movement you
make is still part of that consciousness - trying to get out of it,
accepting it, or rejecting it, is still part of it - then how does the
realization of that truth affect your life?
The realization of the truth of that fact is going to act. You
understand? And that truth, being highly intelligent, will act
according to the moment.
Questioner: But can you realize that, when you are still caught
in your fears and your desires?
Krishnamurti: You can't. You are trying to overcome one
fragment which is fear, by another fragment. That way you cannot
get rid of it, so there must be a different approach to that fragment
which you call fear. And the approach is this: to do absolutely
nothing about fear. Can you?
I can't do anything about the noise of that train going by,
therefore I listen to it. I cannot do a thing about the roar of that
train. Therefore I don't put up a resistance to it, I listen. There is
noise but it does not affect me. In the same way when I realize that
I am neurotic, that I am holding on to a particular way of belief, a
particular way of action, that I am homosexual, or whatever it is,

that I have tremendous prejudices, I just listen to it totally. I do not
resist it, I listen to it totally, completely, with my heart.
We started out by asking if I can look at the whole movement of
life as a unitary process. The killing, the refugees, the war in the
Middle East, the Catholics, the Protestants, the scientists, the
artists, the businessmen, private life, public life, my family, your
family - there is endless division. This division has brought about
such disorder in the world and in myself. Can I look at all this as a
marvellous single movement? I can't, that is a fact. I can't, because
I am fragmented in myself. I am conditioned in myself. So my
concern then is, not to find out how to live a unitary life, but to see
if the fragmentation can come to an end. And that fragmentation
only comes to an end when I realize that all my consciousness is
made up of these fragments. My consciousness is the
fragmentation. And when I say, "There must be integration, it must
be brought together", it is still part of that trick I am playing upon
myself. So I realize that. I realize it as a truth, like fire burns, you
can't deceive me, it is a fact, and I am left with it. And I have to
find out how it operates in my daily life - not guess, play, theorize.
Because I have seen the truth of it, that truth is going to act. If I
don't see it and pretend I have seen it, then I am going to make a
hideous mess of my life.
-- Page 401 --

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VIII CHAPTER 2 2ND PUBLIC DIALOGUE
SAANEN 5TH AUGUST 1971 'IS INTELLIGENCE
AWAKE?'
Krishnamurti: We were discussing the question of the conscious
and the unconscious, and the content of consciousness. Shall we go
on with that, or would you like to discuss another problem this
morning?
Questioner (1): Go on with that.
Questioner (2): I would like to discuss more about the
relationship between intelligence and thought, and between silence
and death.
Questioner (3): I don't know if we have finished with what we
discussed yesterday, and if we really went to the bottom of the
question of motivation in one's life.
Krishnamurti: I wonder if we cannot discuss this question of
consciousness more deeply by considering what is the relationship
between intelligence and thought; and perhaps we can also go into
the problem of silence and its relationship to death. But before we
go into that, there are several things involved in what we were
discussing yesterday. I do not know if you have gone deeply into it
yourself: what you have understood, how much of it is a reality?
We said yesterday, that most of us are conditioned by the
culture, by the environment, by food, clothes, religion and so on.
The conditioning is the content of consciousness and consciousness
is the conditioning. What relationship has thought to that
conditioning? Can there be intelligence where there is

conditioning?
If one has examined and observed oneself objectively, not with
any kind of condemnation or judgment, one realizes that one is
conditioned superficially and in great depth. There is deep
conditioning, which may be the result of the family, the racial
accumulation, the influences which have not been obvious but
nevertheless have penetrated very deeply. Is it at all possible for
the mind ever to be free of all that? When it is conditioned, can the
mind uncondition itself totally? Or can the mind prevent itself - not
through resistance - from ever being conditioned? There are these
two things which we have to examine this morning in relation to
thought and intelligence, and also with regard to silence and death.
If we can, we shall go into this, cover this whole field.
Why does the mind ever get conditioned? Is it so sensitive, so
capable of being hurt? It is a tender, delicate thing, and in
relationship it gets invariably hurt, invariably conditioned. Is it
possible for that conditioning ever to be washed away? One
realizes the mind, the brain itself, is conditioned, evolved through
centuries upon centuries and the brain is the storehouse of
memories. You can watch it yourself, you don't have to read
philosophical or psychological books - at least I don't, though you
may. The brain which has evolved through timewhich is the past,
which is the accumulation of memory, experience, knowledge responds instantly to any challenge according to its conditioning,
superficially or in depth. I think this is clear.
Now can that response from the past be delayed so that there is
an interval between the challenge and the response? I am taking a
very superficial conditioning: one has been brought up in a

particular culture, in a particular belief or pattern, and when that is
questioned there is an instant response according to the background
of the particular person. You tell me I am a fool. My response is
immediate, saying, "You are another", or getting angry with you,
or this or that. Now when you call me a fool, can there be an
interval, a space, before I respond? So that the brain is quiet
enough to respond in a different way. Questioner: Or to observe its
own response.
Krishnamurti: The brain responds all the time according to its
conditioning, according to various forms of stimuli: it is always
active. The brain is the response of time, of memory; in the brain
the whole past is contained. If the brain can hold itself and not
respond immediately, then there is a possibility of a new response.
The brain operates in the old habits established by the culture
we live in, by the past racial inheritance and so on; that responds
all the time, to any stimulus - judging, evaluating, believing, not
believing, discussing, protecting, denying and so on. The brain
cannot be denied its past knowledge; it must have that, otherwise it
can't function. So I am asking whether that brain - which is the old
- will allow itself to be quiet so that a new part can operate. When
you flatter me, the old brain says, "How lovely." But can the old
brain listen to what you say and not respond, so that perhaps a new
movement can take place? That new movement can only take place
when there is silence, when the machinery is not operating in terms
of the past. Is that clear - clear in the sense of watching yourself,
otherwise it is no fun? I am not explaining this for myself, we are
working together.
I find, when one examines one's activities, that the old brain is

always responding according to its limited knowledge, to its
tradition, its racial inheritance, and when that is operating nothing
new can come about. Now I want to find out whether that old brain
can be quiet so that a new movement can take place. I can do that
when I am in relationship with another, watching the old brain in
operation, and when it understands the truth that it must be quiet in
order that a new operation can take place.
The brain is not forcing itself to be quiet. If it is forcing itself to
be quiet then it is still the operation of the past. In that there is
division, there is conflict, there is discipline and all the rest of it.
But if the old brain understands, or sees the truth - that as long as it
is in constant response to any stimulus, it must operate along the
old lines - if the old brain sees the truth of that, then it becomes
quiet. It is the truth that brings about quietness - not the intention to
be quiet. You see, this question is very interesting because one
finds there are certain brains that are never conditioned. You may
say, how do you know? I only know because it has happened to the
speaker. You may believe it, or disbelieve it! Just take the fact.
I am asking why the brain must always function in this old
pattern. Ifit does not fanction in its old pattern, it sets up a new
pattern according to its memories in opposition to the old. We only
use a very small part of the brain and that small part is the past.
There is a part of the brain which has not functioned at all, which is
open, empty, new. Do you know anything about it? Don't agree to
this. You only know the old brain in operation, when you are at all
conscious of it. Now I am asking whether that old brain can be still
to stimuli, so that a new response can come. And the next question
is: how can that brain, which has been so conditioned, hold back a

little? Can I go on?
Questioner: It is very clear.
Krishnamurti: And one finds the brain does hold back when,
there is the necessity, the urgency, when this question is vital - so
that a new quality of mind, of the brain, which has never been
touched, operates. This happens, this is not only my experience.
Any top-level scientist who is free from the desire for success, or
position, must have asked this question, because how does he
discover new things? If the old brain is in operation all the time it
can't discover anything new. So it is only when the old brain is
quiet that something new is seen, and in that quiet state something
new is discovered. This is a fact.
Now, without forcing the brain, how can that quietness come
and the brain be voluntarily quiet? It can discover something new
only when it sees the truth that the old cannot find anything new
and therefore the old becomes quiet. The truth makes it quiet; it
does not wish to be quiet. Is that very clear? Then, can that
quietness operate all the time? - and the old conditioning with its
knowledge operate only when it is necessary. Have you understood
my question?
Questioner: You say, "Operate all the time"? Will that not bring
conflict? Krishnamurti: Please listen, Sir. I want to find out, I am
enquiring, I am not saying, "It must be quiet". I see the old brain
must operate, otherwise I can't speak English, drive a car, or
recognise you. The old brain must operate functionally. But, also,
as long as it is not quiet, no new thing can be seen. Are you
following?
Audience: Yes.

Krishnamurti: I am asking myself: what is the relationship
between the new quality of the brain, which functions in quietness,
and the old? The old is thought - right? The old is the collection of
memories and any response according to these memories is
thought. That thought must function, otherwise you can't do
anything.
Questioner: Aren'tyou making a division?
Krishnamurti: No, it is not a division. It is like a house, it is a
whole, but there are divisions in it.
We have discovered two things. That the old brain - we'll call it
that for the moment - is the conditioned brain which has
accumulated knowledge through centuries upon centuries. We are
not dividing it as the old and the new, we just want to convey the
meaning that there is this whole structure of the brain, one part of
which is the old - which doesn't mean it is separate from the new it is different. Now I am saying to myself: I see that if the old brain
is in operation nothing new can be discovered. The new can be
discovered only when the old is quiet. And the old can only be
quiet when it sees the truth that the new cannot be discovered by
the old. Now we have this fact: the old must naturally be quiet to
discover something new.
Questioner (1): Is the discovery made by the new or the old?
Questioner (2): By neither of them.
Krishnamurti: Answer it, Sirs! My brain says, "I really don't
know, I am going to find out." You have asked a question, which
is: does the old brain recognise the new, or does the new use the
old? The old brain is quiet because it has understood completely
that it can never discover anything new. We won't even use the

word "discover". No new movement can take place if the old is
constantly in operation. The old sees the fact of that and is quiet.
And a new movement, a new happening takes place. Is that
happening recognised by the old, or does it open the door for the
new to utilize it?
Look Sirs, this is really quite important, even though you don't
follow it, because I want to find a totally new way of living. I
realize the old way of living is terrible, ugly, brutal. I must find a
new dimension which is unrelated to the old. Any movement on
the part of the old to discover a different dimension is not possible.
Realizing this, it becomes quiet. Now what takes place in that
quietness? Let's proceed along that way. What takes place when
the old brain has understood that it cannot find a new dimension?
Questioner: The unknown?
Krishnamurti: No, don't invent. Unless you experience this,
don't guess.
Questioner: There is space.
Krishnamurti: Now wait a minute. When the old brain is quiet,
the gentleman says, there is space. Let's examine it. What do you
mean by space?
Questioner: Emptiness.
Krishnamurti: Please don't invent, don't guess, observe. Is your
old brain quiet?
Questioner (1): No.
Questioner (2): If the old brain is quiet, canyou ask that
question?
Krishnamurti: I am asking you. It may be a wrong question, but
we must find out.

Questioner: The part of the brain which is not used starts
operating.
Krishnamurti: Just listen to what he is saying. When the old
brain is quiet, perhaps a new part of the brain which has not been
used comes into operation. That is, we are only functioning with a
very small part of our brain and when that small part of the brain is
quiet, the rest of the brain may be active. Or, it has been active all
the time but we don't know it because that one part which has
accumulated knowledge, tradition, time, is always super-active,
and therefore we don't know the other part at all; it may have its
own activity. Are you following this?
This is really a very interesting question. Please give your
minds to this a little bit; don't say, "I don't understand" and just
drop it. Apply yourselves! You see, having used the old brain so
much we have never considered any other part of the brain, and
what that part is, which may have a quality of a different
dimension. I say that quality of a different dimension can be
discovered when the old brain is really quiet. That's my point. You
follow? When the old brain is completely quiet, not made quiet,
but has naturally understood that it must be quiet and therefore is
quiet, then we can find out what takes place.
Now, I am going to investigate - not you - because your old
brain is not quiet. Would you agree to that? It has not understood
the necessity of being completely quiet under any stimulus, except
of course physical stimuli - that is, if you put a pin into my leg it
will respond. But as nobody is pricking my leg with a pin the old
brain can be quiet.
I want to find out what is the quality of the new brain - that

quality which the old brain cannot recognise? Because the old
brain cannot recognise anything which it has not experienced,
which is not the outcome of memory. Therefore what the old brain
recognises is still the old. Is that clear? So I am asking: what is the
new? The old brain does not know anything about it, therefore it
can only say: I really don't know. Let's proceed from there - do
some of you follow this? The old brain says, "I can't touch this and
I really don't know." Because I cannot touch it, because I cannot
recognise it, I am not going to be deceived by it. I know absolutely
nothing about the new dimensions of this new brain. When the old
brain is quiet and incapable of recognition, it can only say, "I really
don't know." Can the old brain remain in that state of not knowing?
It has said, "All my life I have functioned with knowledge and
recognition." In functioning that way it has said, "I know" in terms
of what I do not know, of that which I will learn, but always within
the pattern of knowing. Now it says, "I really don't know", because
something new is taking place. The new cannot be recognised,
therefore I have no relationship to it yet. I am going to find out.
Now what is the nature of not knowing? Is there fear when there
is a state of not knowing? - which is death. You follow, Sirs?
When the old brain actually says, "I don't know", it has
relinquished all knowing. It has relinquished altogether the
intention of knowing, of wanting to know. So there is a field in
which the old brain cannot function, because it does not know.
Now what is that field? Can it ever be described? It can be
described only when the old brain recognises and verbalises it to
communicate. So there is a field in which the old brain cannot
possibly enter; this is not an invention, this is not a theory, this is a

fact when the old brain says, "I really don't know anything about
this." Which means there is no intention to learn about the new.
You see the difference, Sirs?
So now I want to find out non-verbally, because the moment I
use a word I am back in the old. Therefore is there an
understanding of something new non-verbally? - in the sense of not
inventing a new word, or intending to describe it so as to capture it
and hold it. So I am just enquiring, the mind is looking at
something which it does not know at all. Is that possible? It has
always looked in terms of learning about it, resisting it, avoiding it,
escaping from it, or overcoming it. Now it is doing nothing of the
kind. Do you understand? If this is not possible you cannot
understand the other.
What is the something which the old brain cannot understand
and therefore cannot possibly know or acquire knowledge about?
Is there such a thing? Or is itjust an invention of the old brain
wanting something new to happen? If it is the old brain wanting
something new to happen, it is still part of the old brain. Now I
have examined it completely, so that the old brain has understood
its structure and nature and therefore is absolutely still, not wanting
to know. That is where the difficulty lies. Is there something real,
not imagined, not invented, which is not a theory? Something
which the old brain cannot possibly understand, or recognise, or
want to understand? Is there anything like that? For the speaker
there is - but that has no value, he may be deluding himself. It has
value only in the sense that it is for you to discover it. So you have
to find out what is the relationship of the new - if you see the new to the old, which must operate in life objectively, sanely, non-

personally, therefore efficiently. Does the old capture the new so
that there is a different life? Or does the new operate in a way that
the old cannot possibly recognise, and that operation is the new
way of living?
Go slowly, take time, look! This old brain, with its
consciousness, has lived for thousands of years; the consciousness
of this old brain is its content. Its content may have been acquired
superficially or in depth and that is the old brain with all the
knowledge, with all the experience of centuries of human
endeavour, of evolution. When it is functioning within that field of
consciousness it can never discover anything new. That is an
absolute fact, not a theory. We know nothing about freedom, about
what love is, what death is; we know nothing exceptjealousy, envy,
fear, which are all part of the old content. Then this old brain,
realizing its utter limitation, becomes quiet, because it has found it
has no freedom. And because it has found no freedom, a new part
of the brain is in operation. I don't know if you see that?
Look! I have been going South, thinking I was going North, and
suddenly I discover that. At the moment of discovery there is a
total reversion - not of the old, it is a complete reversal. The
movement is neither to the North nor South, it is in a totally
different direction. That is, at that moment of discovery there is a
totally different movement, which is freedom.
Questioner: Could you discuss the difference between the
intensity to find out, and the desire of the oldfor the new.
Krishnamurti:The desire of the old for the new is still the old;
therefore the desire for the new, or the experience of the new - call
it enlightenment, God, what you like - is still part of the old;

therefore that's out. Questioner (1): Krishnaji, do you realize
thatyou have been speaking of the highest philosophy and that we,
here in this tent, are not even able to have the smallest relationship
with each other.
Questioner (2): Who are we?
Krishnamurti:We have been through that - we are monkeys!
Look, Sir, this is not talking of the "highest philosophy", it is the
pure thing. Do you realize actually, not theoretically, that you have
no relationship one with another, that your relationship with
another cannot exist as long as the old brain is in operation,
because the old brain functions in images, pictures, past incidents;
when the past happenings, images, knowledge, are strong, then
relationship comes to an end - obviously. If I have built an image
about you - who are my wife, or my friend, my girl or whatever it
is - that image, that knowledge, which is the past, obviously
prevents relationship. Relationship means direct contact
immediately in the present, at the same level, with the same
intensity, with the same passion. And that passion, that intensity at
the same level, cannot exist if I have an image about you and you
have an image about me. So it is for you to see if you have an
image about somebody else. Obviously you have; therefore apply
yourself, work to find out - that is, if you really want a relationship
with another, which I doubt. We are all so terribly selfish,
enclosed; if you really want a relationship with another, you have
to understand this whole structure of the past - which is what we
have been doing. And when that is gone, you have a relationship
which is totally new all the time. And that new relationship is love
- not the old, beating the drum!

Now what is the relationship of that quality, of that dimension
which is the new, which is not known, which cannot be captured
by the old, to my daily life? I have discovered that dimension, it
has happened because I have seen that the old brain can never be
free and so is incapable of finding out what truth is. Therefore the
old brain says: my whole structure is of time and I function only
with regard to that which has time - machinery, language, all the
rest of it - so that part will be completely still. So what is the
relationship between the two? Has the old any relationship with
freedom, love, the unknown? If it has relationship with the
unknown, then it is part of the old - you follow? But if the
unknown has relationship with the old, then it is quite a different
proposition. I don't know if you see that?
My question is: what is the relationship between these two, and
who wants relationship? Who is demanding this relationship? Is
the old demanding it? If the old demands it, then it is part of the
old, therefore it has no relationship with the other. I don't know if
you see the beauty of this. The old has no relationship with
freedom, with love, with this dimension. But that new dimension,
love, can have a relationship with the old, but not the other way
round. Do you see it, Sirs?
So the next step then is: what is the action in daily life, when the
old has no relationship with the new, but the new is establishing
relationship as it moves in life. The mind has discovered something
new. How is the new going to operate in the field of the known, in
which functions the old brain with all its activities?
Questioner: Would that be where intelligence comes in?
Krishnamurti: Now wait Sir, perhaps you are right. When the

old brain sees that it can never understand what freedom is; when it
sees that it is incapable of discovering something new, that very
perception is the seed of intelligence, isn't it? That is intelligence:
"I cannot do." I thought I could do a lot of things, and I can, in a
certain direction, but in a totally new direction I cannot do
anything. The discovery of that is intelligence, obviously.
Now what is the relationship of that intelligence to the other? Is
the other part of this extraordinary sense of intelligence? I want to
find out what we mean by that word "intelligence; the mind must
not be caught by words. Obviously the old brain, all these
centuries, thought it could have its God, its freedom, it could do
everything it wanted. And suddenly it discovers that any movement
of the old brain is still part of the old; therefore intelligence is the
understanding that it can only function within the field of the
known. The discovery of that is intelligence, we say. Now what is
that intelligence? What is its relationship to life, to a dimension
which the old brain does not know?
You see, intelligence is not personal, is not the outcome of
argument, belief, opinion or reason. Intelligence comes into being
when the brain discovers its fallibility, when it discovers what it is
capable of, and what not. Now what is the relationship of that
intelligence with this new dimension? I would rather not use the
word "relationship".
The different dimension can only operate through intelligence;
if there is not that intelligence it cannot operate. So in daily life it
can only operate where intelligence is functioning. Intelligence
cannot function when the old brain is active, when there is any
form of belief and adherence to any particular fragment of the

brain. All that is lack of intelligence. The man who believes in
God, the man who says, "There is only one Saviour", is not
intelligent. The man who says, "I belong to this group", is not
intelligent. When one discovers the limitation of the old, the very
discovery of that is intelligence, and only when that intelligence is
functioning can the new dimension operate through it. Full stop.
Have you got it?
Questioner: May Iput another question? I don't completely
agree with you. Whatyou say about intelligence applies only to
primary intelligence. But we need also secondary intelligence; that
is, the ability to integrate what is new with the old.
Krishnamurti: That is what takes place when there is not
intelligence. I won't use the word "integrate; the new operates
when there is that intelligence which is not only primary but
fundamental.
Questioner: Butyou see, inyour talk today I always heard the
word "primary". I think whatyou call "new", is in a certain sense
primary. If I play a game, throwing a coin, I cannot predict what
will appear and one says one's game here is a random event. I want
to know what you think about the relation of whatyou call
"completely new" with what is random in the sense I have
explained it.
Krishnamurti: I understand. The professor asks, what is the
relationship of randomness, ofchance, to something totally new.
There are events in one's life that appear to happen by chance,
events that occur at random. Is that happening new, totally
unexpected? Or is it the result of unexamined, hidden, unconscious
events?

I happen to meet you by chance. Is that chance at all, or has it
happened because certain unconscious, unknown, events have
brought us together? We may consider this chance, but it is not
chance at all. I meet you, I did not know you existed, and in the
meeting something has taken place between us. That may be the
result of a great many other events of which we are not conscious,
and we may then say, "This is a random event, this is an
unexpected chance, this is totally new." It may not be that. Is there
chance in life at all? - a happening which has not a cause. Or have
all events in life their basic, deep, causes, which we may not know
and therefore we say, "Our meeting happens by chance, it is a
random event." The cause undergoes a change when there is an
effect. The effect becomes a cause. There is the cause and the
effect which becomes the cause of the next effect. So cause-effect
is a constant chain; it is not one cause, one effect, it is undergoing
constant change. Each cause, each effect, changes the next cause,
the next effect. So as this is going on in life, is there anything
which is unexpected, chance, a random event? What do you say?
Questioner: The very concept of randomness is based on
causality.
Krishnamurti: Causality? I don't think life works that way. The
cause becomes effect and the effect becomes cause - you can see in
this life. So we can never say, "Cause and effect" there it is! The
professor asked about the relationship of the unknown - not in the
sense of a new dimension - to a chance event.
Questioner: The unknown is outside the world of relativity.
Krishnamurti: You can discuss it. I know nothing about all this,
I am talking about human relationships, human beings, not

mathematical problems and chance events and mathematical order.
All that does not seem to affect our daily living. Here we are
concerned to bring about a change in that daily living - the way we
behave. And if our behaviour is based on that past it still brings
conflict and misery; that is what we are talking about.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VIII CHAPTER 3 4TH PUBLIC DIALOGUE
SAANEN 7TH AUGUST 1971 'FEAR'
Questioner (1): I would like to discuss fear and death and their
relationship to intelligence and thought.
Questioner (2): Couldyou go into the statement: the world is me
and am the world?
Questioner (3): Could we discuss - but not theorise - about what
happens after death if it in actually possible to die to things known?
Krishnamurti: Fear is a complex problem and we have to
enquire into it, not come with any preconceived ideas, but really
penetrate into this whole question of fear. Now first of all, in
enquiring into this problem, we are not trying to deal with it as
collective fear, nor are we discussing it as group therapy to get rid
of fear. We are going to find out what fear means and what are its
nature and structure; whether the fear deep down at the very root of
our being can be understood, and whether the mind can ever be
free from fear. How do you approach this problem? Have you got
any kind of fear - physical or psychological? If you have
psychological fears - we shall come back to the physical fears a
little later - how do you deal with them?
Suppose I am afraid that I shall lose my position, my prestige: I
depend on an audience, on you, to bolster me up, I depend on you
to give me vitality by talking. I am afraid, as I grow older, I may
become senile. I will be faced with nothing and I am afraid. What
is this fear? Or I am afraid that I depend on you - a man or a
woman - and that dependency makes me attached to you, so I am

afraid to lose you. Or I am afraid because I have done something in
the past, which I regret or am ashamed of, and I don't want you to
know; so I am afraid of your knowing it and I feel guilty. Or I feel
terribly anxious about death, about living, about what people say,
or don't say, how they look at me. I have a deep sense of
foreboding, anxiety, a sense of inferiority. And in this anxiety
about death, living a life that has no meaning, I seek assurance
from somebody through human relationship. Or out of my anxiety
I seek a sense of security in a certain belief, a certain ideology, in
God, and so on.
Also I am afraid that I shan't be able to do everything I want to
do in this life. I have not the capacity nor the intelligence, but I am
tremendously ambitious to achieve something; so I am frightened
of that too. And of course I am afraid of death; and I am afraid of
being lonely, of not being loved; so I want to establish a
relationship with another in which this fear, this anxiety, this sense
of loneliness, this separation, does not exist. Also I am afraid of the
dark, of the elevator - innumerable neurotic fears!
What is this fear? Why are you, why is anybody, afraid? Is it
based on not wanting to be hurt? Or is it that one wants complete
security, and not being able to find it - this sense of complete
safety, of protection, physically, emotionally, psychologically - one
becomes terribly anxious about living! - so there is this sense of
uncertainty. Now why is there fear?
One of our major problems is fear, whether we are aware of it
or not, whether we run away from it or try to overcome it, try to
withstand it, develop courage and all the rest of it, there is still fear.
I am asking myself, I am asking you, whether the mind is so

delicate, so sensitive, that from childhood on it does not want to be
hurt. And not wanting to be hurt one builds a wall. One is very shy,
or aggressive; before you attack I am ready to attack you verbally,
or with thought. I have been hurt so much in my life, everybody
hurts me - everybody treads on one's toes - and I don't want to be
hurt. Is that one of the reasons why fear exists?
You have been hurt, haven't you? And out of that hurt you do
all kinds of things. We resist a great deal, we don't want to be
disturbed; out of that feeling of hurt we cling to something which
we hope will protect us. Therefore we become aggressive towards
anything that attacks what we are holding on to for protection.
As a human being sitting here, wanting to resolve this problem
of fear, what is it that you are frightened of? Is it physical fear fear of physical pain? Or a psychological fear of danger, of
uncertainty, of being hurt again? Or of not being able to find total,
complete security? Is it fear of being dominated, and yet we are
dominated? So what is it that you are frightened of? Are you aware
of your fear?
Questioner: I fear the unknown.
Krishnamurti: Now listen to that question. Why should one be
afraid of the unknown, when you know nothing about it? Please
enquire into it.
Questioner: I have an image of what has happened to me and
there is the fear that it might happen again.
Krishnamurti: But is it the fear of letting go the known? Or fear
of the unknown? You understand? Fear of letting go the things I
have gathered - my property, my wife, my name, my books, my
furniture, my good looks, my capacities - to let go the things that I

know, that I have experienced: is that the fear? Or is it fear of the
future, the unknown?
Questioner: I find that my fear generally is of what will happen,
not of what is happening.
Krishnamurti: Shall we go into that?
Questioner: It isn't that one is frightened of what might happen
tomorrow, but of losing one's own recognitions, one's satisfactions,
today.
Krishnamurti: Look, the gentleman asked a question which was:
"I am not frightened of yesterday or of today, but I am frightened
of what might happen tomorrow, in the future." Tomorrow may be
twenty-four hours away or a year, but I am frightened of that.
Questioner: But the future is the result of all the expectations
one has because of the past. Krishnamurti: I am frightened of the
future, how shall I deal with this? Don't explain it to me, I want to
find out what to do with this fear. I am frightened what might
happen: I might get ill, I might lose my job, a dozen things might
happen to me, I may go insane, lose all the things which I have
stored up. Now please enquire.
Questioner: I think perhaps it is not the future that we fear but
rather the uncertainty of the future, new events which cannot be
predicted. If the future were predictable there would be no fear, we
should know what would happen. Fear is a sort of defence of the
body against something completely new, against the whole
uncertainty of what life is.
Krishnamurti: I am afraid of the future because the future is
uncertain." I don't know how to deal with this uncertainty, with my
whole being, therefore I am afraid. Fear is an indication of this

uncertainty of the future, is that it?
Questioner: That's only a part of it. There are otherfears too.
Krishnamurti: Sir, we are taking one fear; we will discuss
various forms of fears presently. The gentleman says, "I am not
really frightened of anything except of the future. The future is so
uncertain, I don't know how to meet it. I havxx the capacity to
understand not only the present but also the future." So it is this
sense of uncertainty that indicates fear.
Whatever the explanation be, the fact is I am frightened of
tomorrow. Now how shall I deal with it? How shall I be free of that
fear?
Questioner: Looking at one's response to the uncertainty of
thefuture it seems it might be inadequate.
Krishnamurti: I am frightened of tomorrow, of what might
happen. The whole future is uncertain, there might be an atomic
war, there might be an ice age - I am frightened of all that. How am
I to deal with it? Help me, don't theorize about it, don't give me
explanations!
Questioner (1): Need uncertainty breedfear? Questioner (2): We
are frightened because we are pretending, playing games, and we
are afraid, of being exposed.
Krishnamurti: But you are not helping me! Aren't you
frightened of the future, Sir? - stick to this.
Questioner: Yes, perhaps.
Krishnamurti: Now, how are you going to deal with it?
Questioner: By living in the present.
Krishnamurti: I don t know what that means.
Questioner (1): For me it has been helpful to realize what I have

been afraid of in the past, and why I have been afraid, and to
submit this to examination. This helps me to face the future.
Questioner (2): First of all we have got to understand what we
mean by the future.
Krishnamurti: That's what I am trying to find out.
Questioner: The first thing we have to do is not to be afraid of
being frightened.
Krishnamurti: Oh, that is a cliche, that doesn't help me!
Questioner: One has to realize you can't help me out: fear is
always there. One has to understand fear is going to be a life
companion.
Krishnamurti: Sir, you have not fed me. You have given me a
lot of words, ashes. I am still frightened of tomorrow.
Questioner (1): That is just the problem. You can't help anyone.
Questioner (2): Can'tyou waitfor tomorrow and let things come,
see what happens?
Questioner (3): I know the necessity for physical security, but I
want to understand my need for psychological security.
Krishnamurti: He means that, Sir. He probably has some
security physically, but psychologically he is frightened of
tomorrow. He has got a little bank account, a little house and all
the rest of it, he is not frightened about that; he is frightened of
what might happen in the future.
Questioner (1): Is it possible to live with your uncertainty?
Questioner (2): If we knew what was going to happen, we
should not be afraid.
Questioner (3): Sitting here I am not afraid, but thinking about
tomorrow I get frightened.

Krishnamurti: Thought does it.
Questioner: Thought does it. When we are frightened now, it is
afact. If we accept the fact and if we live totally in the present, we
forget the future.
Krishnamurti: Right, let's look. I want to find out what causes
this fear of tomorrow. What is tomorrow? Why does tomorrow
exist at all? You understand? I am going to answer it.
I want to find out how thought arises, how fear arises. I think
about tomorrow, and the past has given me a sense of security;
though there may have been a great many uncertainties in the past,
on the whole I have survived. Up to now I am fairly safe, but
tomorrow is very uncertain and I am frightened. So I am going to
find out what causes this fear of tomorrow. The response of my
whole being to that insecurity of tomorrow being uncertain, is fear.
So I want to find out why fear arises when I think about the future.
Which mean the future may be all right, but my thinking abou the
uncertainty. I don't know the future, it may be marvellous, or it
may be deadly, it may be terrible, or most beautiful, I don't know;
thought is not certain about the future. So thought, which has
always been seeking certainty, is suddenly faced with this
uncertainty. So why does thought create fear? You follow?
Questioner: Because thought divides and creates a distance
between past andfuture, andfear enters into this space.
Krishnamurti: The questioner says, "Thought separates the future
from the past and divides what might be. This separation of `what
is' and `what might be' is part of this fear." If I did not think about
tomorrow, there would be no fear, I would not know the future, I
would not even care. Because I think about the future - the future

which I don't know, the future which is so uncertain - my whole
response, psychologically as well as physically, is to say, "My
God, what is going to happen?" So thought breeds fear.
Questioner: Is thought the only psychological function that is
able to bring aboutfear? There are some other irrationalfunctions
likefeeling; that might bring aboutfear as well.
Krishnamurti: I am taking that one particular thing, there are
other factors too.
Questioner (1): There is fear of the unknown, fear of tomorrow;
it is based on attachment to a belief, or someformula. Thefear can
be understood if I see why I am attached to a particular convention
or belief.
Questioner (2): What aboutfear of existence?
Krishnamurti: All these are involved, are they not? The
attachment to a belief, to a formula, to a certain ideological concept
which I have built for myself, all these are part of this fear. Now I
want to find out by seeing what is fear.
I said to you earlier I have done something in the past of which
I am ashamed, or of which I am frightened: I don't want it to recur.
Thinking about what I have done in the past breeds fear, doesn't it?
Thinking about what might happen in the future also breeds fear.
So I see - I may be wrong - that thought is responsible for the fear,
both of the past and of the future. And thought is also responsible
for fear by projecting an ideal, a belief, and holding on to that
belief and wanting certainty out of that belief; it is all the operation
of thought, isn't it? So I have to understand why thought thinks
about the future, why thought goes back to some event which has
brought fear. Why does thought do this?

Questioner: Thought can help itself by imagining all the
possibilities of terrible things that could happen in the future, so it
can make some plans to prevent these things happening. It tries to
protect itself by imagining.
Krishnamurti: Thought also helps you to protect yourself,
through insurance, through building a house, avoiding wars;
thought cultivates fear and also protects, doesn't it? We are talking
about thought creating fear, not how it protects. I am asking why
thought breeds this fear; thought also breeds pleasure, doesn't it? sexual pleasure, the pleasure of the sunset which happened
yesterday and so on. So thought gives a continuity to pleasure and
also to fear.
Questioner: Man, seeking pleasure, follows the choice of his
thoughts by discriminating. " This would be good" and " That
would be bad". And fear seems to come directly from what man
does to make the good things happen and to avoid the bad.
Krishnamurti: Surely the whole process is based on thought,
isn't it?
Questioner: Fear comes from the discriminating aspect of
thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes, but it is still thought, saying, "This is good,
this I will keep, this reject." The whole movement of thought is the
demand for pleasure and discrimination in that, saying, "This will
give me pleasure, that will not." So the whole movement of fear
and pleasure, the demand, and the continuity of both, depends on
thought, doesn't it?
Questioner: But how can you be free from it?
Krishnamurti: Wait, first let's get this thing going.

Questioner: Thought is fear.
Krishnamurti: We are going to find out. I am safe today. I know
I am going to have my meals, there is a house, there is a room; but
I don't know what is going to happen tomorrow. Yesterday I had a
great deal of pleasure in various forms, and I want those pleasures
repeated tomorrow. So thought both sustains fear and gives a
continuity to the pleasure which I had yesterday. Then my question
is: how am I going to prevent the continuity of fear, but yet let
pleasure continue? I want pleasure, want it as much as possible, all
the time in the fu ture; and also I have had fears, I want to get rid of
them and I don't want future fears. So thought is working in both
directions. Sir, this is your job, not mine, look at it!
Questioner: This gives thought a kind of energy.
Krishnamurti: Thought is energy.
Questioner: This gives thought a different kind of energy.
Krishnamurti: Go into it, it is both.
Questioner: It is accumulating memories.
Krishnamurti: The memories that have been pleasurable I hold
on to, and the memories that have been painful - which are fear - I
want to throw out. But I don't see the root of all this is thought.
Questioner (1): Thought seems to resist its termination - fear
and pleasure seem to be somewhat similar - but that state where
thought doesn't exist eludes me.
Questioner (2): Do what you are doing so totally, that you think
about the thing that is giving you pleasure while it is happening,
and don't think about the things which may not happen.
Krishnamurti: Don't say: not to think about those things which
might not happen. How am I to prevent myself from thinking about

them?
Questioner: Think about what is happening, rejoice!
Krishnamurti: So I force myself to think about things that are
happening and not about things that don't happen?
Questioner: Think about what is happening.
Krishnamurti:But my mind is always watching what might
happen. Doesn't this happen to you? Let's be quite simple and
honest. We want to think about the things that are happening but
thought also keeps an eye on what might happen. And when I am
not thinking about this, that pops up!
Questioner: Sir, the feeling "I am" has nothing to do with
pleasure and nothing to do withfear and thought. I think only "I
am". I don't havefear. Thisfeeling "I am" has nothing at all to do
with thought.
Krishnamurti: When you say "I am" - what do you mean by
those words?
Questioner: Thefeeling to be present, to be sitting here, and
there is no fear in it.
Krishnamurti: That is not the problem, Sir.
Questioner: First of all we must find out if certainty exists, then
there won't be fear.
Krishnamurti: How shall I find out?
Questioner: I see the whole process of thought as a trap.
Krishnamurti: Go into it; each person pursues something else.
Let me state what I feel the problem is.
I am frightened of tomorrow because tomorrow is uncertain. So
far I have been fairly certain in my life; though there have been
occasions on which I have been frightened, somehow I have got

over them. But the sense of fear of tomorrow, which is so uncertain
- atomic war, the casual wars that might explode into all kinds of
horrors, losing money - I am in a state of convulsion about the
future. Now what am I to do? I want to be free, if I can, of the fear
both of the past and the future, of the fears deep down and the
superficial fears.
Don't give me explanations, "Do this", "Don't do that." I want to
find out what fear is; whether it is fear of darkness, of uncertainty,
whether it is the fear of attachment, holding on to something, or to
some person or idea. I want to find out what is the root ofit, how to
escape from it, not how to smother it. I want to see the structure of
fear. If I can understand that, then something else can take place.
So I am going to investigate what fear is. Let me go on a little
while, may I? Fear exists for me because I am thinking about
tomorrow; despite your assurance that tomorrow is perfectly all
right, I still feel fear. Now why am I thinking about tomorrow? Is it
because the past has been so good, has given me a great deal of
knowledge and this has become my security, and I have no
knowledge about the future? If I could understand the future and
reduce that to my knowledge, then I would not be frightened. Can I
understand the future as knowledge, as experience, so that it
becomes part of my knowledge, of which I shan't be frightened?
I see also, that I want a great deal of pleasure, sexual pleasure,
the pleasure of achieving, fulfilling, of being somebody. I want
those pleasures, which I have had, repeated. And when I get bored
with them I want wider, deeper pleasures. My principle drive is
pleasure - in every direction. So I want to avoid fear and I want
more pleasure. This is what we all xxs pleasure separate from fear?

Or are they the two sides of the same coin? I must find out, not say
"Yes" or "No", I must put my teeth into it and find out whether
pleasure does breed fear and whether fear is the result of my
demand for pleasure. You have understood my question?
Questioner: But pleasure could be something else, a learning
process.
Krishnamurti: No, that pleasure is also painful; but I will
overcome that in order to have more pleasure. Haven't you noticed
this in your life, how we want pleasure?
Questioner: Yes.
Krishnamurti: That's all I am talking of. We are demanding,
pursuing, pleasure; everything is based on this. And when that is
not fulfilled, I become uncertain. So I am asking myself whether
pleasure and fear don't go together. I never question pleasure, I
never say, "Should I have so much pleasure?" "Where does it
lead?" but I want more of it, in heaven, on earth, in my family, in
sex - it is driving me in everything. And fear is there also. Look at
it please, don't slick to your particular opinion, for God's sake
move from it! Find out!
So follow this: I want certainty of tomorrow, and certainty can
only exist where there is knowledge, when I say,"I know". Can I
know anything except the past? The moment I say "I know" it is
already the past. When I say "I know my wife", I know her in
terms of the past. In the past there is certainty and in the future
there is uncertainty. So I want to draw the future into the past so
that I will be completely safe. I see fear arises where thought is
operating; if I did not think about tomorrow there would be no fear.
Questioner: Fear seems to me to be something instinctive. Ifeel

that fear is an energy, that someforce is there.
Krishnamurti: You see, each of us has an opinion. Each of us is
quite sure we know how to deal with fear. We explain it, we give
causes, we think we understand it, and yet at the end of it we are
frightened. I want to go behind all that and find out why fear exists
at all. Is it the result of thought thinking about the future? Because
the future is very uncertain and thought is based on the memory of
the past. Thought is the response of memory, accumulated as
knowledge, as centuries of experience, and out of that comes
thought. Thought says, "Knowledge is my security". And now you
are telling me to be free of tomorrow, which is uncertain; if I know
what tomorrow is, there will be no fear. What I am craving for is
certainty of knowledge. I know my past, I know what I did ten
years or two days ago. I can analyse it, understand it, live with it;
but I don't know tomorrow and therefore not knowing it makes me
afraid. Not knowing means: not having knowledge of. Now can
thought have knowledge about something which it does not know?
So there is fear. Thought trying to find out the future, and not
knowing what its content is, it is afraid. Why is thought thinking of
tomorrow, about which it knows nothing? It wants certainty, but
there may be no certainty. Please answer my question, not your
question.
Questioner: The living system needs to think about tomorrow,
this is a fundamental rule of life: it needs some sort of prediction.
Krishnamurti: I said that, Sir.
Questioner: We must follow this rule of life. There are
psychological disturbances due to imagination which project awful
fears, as you say, but it is impossible to prevent human beingsfrom

thinking in a logical fashion.
Krishnamurti: If I may say so, we did say thought is necessary
to protect physical survival. That is part of our life, that is what we
are doing all the time.
Questioner: I don't agree, I think thought is not necessaryfor
survival. Animals have the instinctfor survival without thefear
which is our trouble.
Krishnamurti: Madam, we are mixing up two things. Please, we
tried to explain this at the beginning.
Questioner: She's right; human thought replaces instinct.
Krishnamurti: I agree with you. One must know that tomorrow
the house will be there. Physical sumival and planning for the
future are essential, aren't they? Without that we can't survive.
Questioner (1): Whenyou see it all so clearly, fear has no time.
Questioner (2): Thought thinks of living in the present, and
must also think of tomorrow.
Krishnamurti: The weather is hot, I must plan to buy some
trousers that will be cool. That means planning for tomorrow. I
have to go to India in the winter. I shall plan, which is the future.
We are not denying that, on the contrary. What we are talking
about is the fear of uncertainty.
Questioner: We have no confidence in ourselves.
Krishnamurti: That I really don't understand. Who is "yourself"
for you to have confidence in? Are you such a marvellous human
being to have confidence in yourself?
Questioner: Why not?
Krishnamurti: What is yourself?
Questioner: Humanity. Krishnamurti: What is humanity? The

good and the bad, the wars - we have been through all that. We are
concerned with fear. We must use thought to survive. But to
survive, thought has divided the world as my country, your
country, my government, your government, my God, your God, my
guru and your guru: thought has created this. Though it wants to
plan to survive, thought has divided the world which destroys
itself, of which I am part. So I have to understand the nature of
thought, where it is necessary, and where it is diabolical, where it
is destructive and where it creates fear - that is my problem.
I said thought must function, otherwise you can't survive; but in
the desire to survive it has divided and is therefore destructive. I
see thought must function clearly, objectively, without any
distortion. So my question is: why does thought think about
tomorrow? It has to think about tomorrow in one direction, but
why does thought think about the future and breed fear?
Questioner: To be safe.
Krishnamurti: You see, thought must think about tomorrow in
order to be safe, that is clear. And also you see that thought,
thinking about tomorrow, creates fear. Now why?
Questioner (1): Because we want to continue.
Questioner (1): Because we are tied to pleasure.
Krishnamurti: We haven't solved this problem because we
refuse to leave our particular little opinions, judgments and
conclusions. Let's abolish them and think anew.
For me it is very simple. Thought must create fear because
thought cannot ever find security in the future. Thought has
security in time; tomorrow has no time. Tomorrow exists in the
mind as time, but tomorrow may not exist at all, psychologically.

And because of that uncertainty, thought projects what it wants for
tomorrow: safety, what I have acquired, what I have achieved,
what I possess, all that. And that too is completely uncertain. So
can thought be quiet about the future? That's my point. Can thought
be quiet, which means: function where it is necessary for physical
protection; and therefore no divisions into nationalities, no separate
Gods, no warmongers. Let thought be quiet so that time as
tomorrow does not exist.
Therefore I have to understand what it is to live now. I don't
understand what it is to live now, nor have I understood what it is
to live in the past, therefore I want to live in the future, which I
don't know, as I don't know what the present is. So I am asking,
can I live completely, wholly, today? I can only do that when I
have understood the whole machinery and the functioning of
thought, and in the very understanding of the reality of thought
there is silence. And where the mind is quiet there is no future, no
time.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VIII CHAPTER 4 5TH PUBLIC DIALOGUE
SAANEN 8TH AUGUST 1971 'FEAR, TIME AND
THE IMAGE'
Questioner (1): You have covered enough ground, couldn't we
consolidate? I am not quite sure in myself about the relation
between thought and fear; could we discuss this some more?
Questioner (2): When thought meets the unknown, it doesn't
know what to do. Now if you have thought without time, if there is
no time, then there is no fear.
Krishnamurti: Would you like to talk about that?
Audience: Yes.
Krishnamurti: What is time? I had to be here this morning in
spite of the bad weather at half past ten and I was. If I did not come
on time, I would keep you all waiting. There is time by the watch yesterday, today and tomorrow. There is time to cover a certain
distance - between here and the moon, to go from here to
Montreux, and so on. There is also time to cover the distance
between the image of myself - or the image I have projected of
myself - and what "I should be", and the distance between what "I
am" and what "I should like to be", between fear and the ending of
fear. We must understand this.
Questioner: Can you give practical examples as you go along?
Krishnamurti: I am not good at giving practical examples. What
I am saying is fairly simple. I am not a philosopher, I don't spin
theories.
So there is time as yesterday, today and tomorrow; and there is

time - at least we think there is time - between what I am and what
I should be, between the fact of fear and the eventual ending of
fear. Both are time, aren't they? - chronological time, and time as
invented by thought. "I am this" and "I should change to that" and
to cover that distance between what I am and what I should be I
need time. That also is time. It will take me many days, or many
weeks, to do certain exercises properly, to loosen up my muscles to do that I need time; I shall take perhaps three days, or a week:
that's time.
So when we talk about time, let us be clear what we are talking
about. There is chronological time, as yesterday, today and
tomorrow; and there is the time which we think is necessary to
achieve an ending to fear. Time is part of fear, isn't it? I am afraid
of the future - not of what might happen in the future but of the
idea of the future, the idea of tomorrow. So there is psychological
time and chronological time. We are not talking about
chronological time, time by the watch. What we are talking about
is, "I am all right now, but I am afraid of the fu ture, of tomorrow."
Let's call that psychological time.
Now I am asking, is there such a thing as psychological time at
all, or is it merely an invention of thought? "I shall meet you
tomorrow, under a tree, near the bridge" - that is chronological
time. "I am afr aid of tomorrow and I don't know how to meet that
fear of tomorrow" - that is psychological time, isn't it?
Questioner: How about if I say, " Why must this beautiful thing
come to an end?"
Krishnamurti: That is also psychological time, isn't it? I feel a
particular relationship to something beautiful and I don't want it to

end. There is the idea that it might come to an end and I won't like
it to end, and I am afraid of it. So that's one part of the structure of
fear.
The other is, I have known security, certainty, and tomorrow is
uncertain and I am afraid of that - that is psychological
time, isn't it? I have lived a life of quasi-security, but tomorrow
is dreadfully uncertain and I am frightened of it. Then arises my
problem: how am I not to be afraid? All that is involved, surely, is
it not, in psychological time? The knowledge of yesterday, of many
thousand yesterdays, has given to the brain a certain sense of
security, knowledge being experience, remembrance, memories. In
the past there has been security for the brain; tomorrow there may
be no security at all, I might be killed.
Knowledge as time gives to the brain a sense of security. So
knowledge is of time. But I have no knowledge of tomorrow,
therefore I am afr aid. If I had knowledge of tomorrow I would not
be afr aid. So knowledge breeds fear, and yet I must have
knowledge. You are following? I must have knowledge to go from
here to the station, I must have knowledge to speak English, or
French, or whatever it is; I must have knowledge to carry out any
kind of function. I have accumulated knowledge about myself as
the experiencer, and yet that experiencer is frightened of tomorrow
because he does not know tomorrow.
Questioner: What about repetition?
Krishnamurti: It is the same thing, it is mechanical. After all,
knowledge is repetitive. I add to it or take away from it, but it's a
machinery of accumulation.
Questioner: What about the people who have terrible tragedies,

who have seen people slaughtered and tortured?
Krishnamurti: What has that got to do with what we are talking
about?
Questioner: Well, you see, they remain with that fear.
Krishnamurti: We are talking about the relationship between
thought and fear.
Questioner: But even so, people have been telling me how their
fear remains in them and they can't get rid of it because for them
man is a beast.
Krishnamurti: It is the same problem, surely. That is, I have
been hurt, by a snake or by a human being. That hurt has left a
deep mark on my brain and I am afraid of snakes or of human
beings - which is the past. Also I am afraid of tomorrow. It is the
same problem, isn't it? - only one is in the past, the other is in the
future.
Questioner: It's only difficult when you say, "Knowledge
ofyesterday
has given security." Some people find the knowledge
ofyesterday has given them insecurity. Krishnamurti: Knowledge
gives security and it also gives insecurity, doesn't it? I have been
hurt by human beings in the past - that's knowledge. That remains
deeply rooted and I loathe human beings, I am frightened of them.
Questioner: One isn't speaking of psychological knowledge but
of physical torture.
Krishnamurti: Yes, physical torture which is again in the past.
Questioner: But you know that in the present people go on
doing it.
Krishnamurti: You are mixing up two facts. We are talking

about fear and its relationship to thought. There are physical
tortures going on in the world, people are extraordinarily brutal and
I like to think about it and get terribly excjted. I feel morally
righteous about it and I can't do anything, can I? Sitting in this tent
I can't do anything about what is happening in another place. But I
like to get neurotically excited about it, and to say, "It's terrible
what human beings are doing." No? What can I actually do? Join a
group that is going to stop this torture of human beings? Make a
demonstration in front of somebody? - and yet the torture will go
on. What I am concerned with is how to change the human mind so
that it will not torture human beings physically or psychologically
in any way. But if I am neurotic I like to keep on thinking, "How
terrible this world is."
Now let's come back. I am afraid of what human beings have
done to me, or to another human being, and that knowledge is a
scar in the brain. That is, knowledge of the past not only gives
certainty but also uncertainty, that I may be hurt tomorrow,
therefore I am afraid. Now why does the brain retain the memory
of that hurt of yesterday? In order to protect itself from future
hurts? Let's think it out. That means, I am always facing the world
with that hurt and therefore I have no relationship with another
human bring, because the hurt is so deep. And I resist every human
relationship because I might get hurt again. Therefore there is fear.
Knowledge of the past hurt brings fear of fu ture hurt. So
knowledge brings fear - yet I must have knowledge.
Knowledge has been accumulated through time. Scientific,
-- Page -technological knowledge, knowledge of a language and so on

need time. Knowledge, which is the product of time, must exist,
otherwise I can't do anything, I can't communicate with you. But
also I see that knowledge of a past hurt says, "Be careful not to be
hurt in the future." So I am afraid of the future.
So how am I, who have been scarred very deeply, how am I to
be free of that and not project that knowledge into the future,
saying, "I am afraid of the future." There are two problems
involved, aren't there? There is the scar of pain,
Can the mind be free of that scar? Now let's examine that.
I am sure most of us have some kind of psychological scars.
Haven't you? - of course. We are not talking about the physical
scars which affect the brain - we can leave that aside for the
moment. There are the psychological scars of hurt. How is the
mind, the brain, to be fr ee of them? Must it be free of them? Is not
the memory of being hurt a protection against the future? Verbally,
in many ways you have hurt me; there is a memory of it. If I forget
that, I come innocently to you next morning and you hurt me again.
So what am I to do? Think it out, Sirs, go on.
Questioner: Isn't it important for me to find out why I am
psychologically capable of being hurt?
Krishnamurti: It is fairly simple. We are very sensitive, there
are a dozen reasons. I have an image about myself and I don't want
you to hurt that image. I think I am a great man, you come along
and put a pin into it and it hurts me. Or I feel terribly inferior and I
meet you, who feel extraordinarily superior, and I get hurt. You are
clever, I am not - I get hurt. You are beautiful, I am not. The
knowledge of being hurt, not only physically but psychologically,
inwardly, has left a mark on the brain as memory. Memory is

knowledge. Why should I be free of that knowledge? If I am free,
you are going to hurt me again. Therefore that knowledge acts as a
resistance, as a wall. And what happens in relationship between
human beings when there is this wall between you and me?
Questioner: We can't meet. Krishnamurti: Exactly. So what do
we do? Go on Sir, pursue it!
Questioner: Take away the wall.
Krishnamurti: But you are going to hurt me.
Questioner: It's only the image that is hurt.
Krishnamurti: No, Sir. Look, I come to you quite innocently.
The root meaning of that word "innocent" is that you cannot be
hurt. So I come to you open, friendly, and you say something to me
which hurts me. Doesn't this happen to all of you? And what takes
place? That leaves a mark - that's knowledge. What is wrong with
that knowledge? That knowledge acts as a wall between you and
me. Of course! Therefore what shall I do?
Questioner: You've got to break through.
Krishnamurti: First look at it, don't say, "Break through" - just
look at it. You've hurt me and the knowledge of that remains. If I
have no knowledge of it, you will hurt me again; and if I have that
knowledge strengthened, it acts as a wall between you and me.
Therefore between you and me there is no relationship. So
knowledge of the past prevents a relationship between you and me.
What shall I do?
Questioner: Examine it.
Krishnamurti: I have examined it, I have taken ten minutes in
the examination of it and I see that examination, that analysis is
totally useless.

Questioner: Is this where time comes in?
Krishnamurti: I have taken ten minutes - analysis implied ten
minutes - and that ten minutes is a waste.
Questioner: If there were no time...
Krishnamurti: I have used time. Don't say there is no time.
Questioner: But if there were no time.
Krishnamurti: I don't know, that's a supposition. I have
ten minutes to see why I am hurt, to examine the hurt, to see the
necessity of keeping that hurt as knowledge. I have asked myself:
if I remove that hurt, won't you hurt me again? And I see, as long
as that hurt remains, there is no relationship between you and me.
All that has taken more than a quarter of an hour. And I see I have
achieved nothing at the end of it. So I have found analysis has no
value at all. What shall I do, having been hurt and remembering
that hurt prevents all relationship?
Questioner: We have to accept being hurt.
Krishnamurti: No, I'm neither accepting nor rejecting, I'm
looking. I don't accept or reject anything. My question then is,
"Why am I hurt?" What is this thing that is being hurt?
Questioner: The knowledge of being afool in fact.
Krishnamurti: Sir, say something that's actual, don't imagine
and then verbalize. First find out what it is that is being hurt. When
I say I am hurt because you call me a fool, what is it that is being
hurt?
Questioner: Your pride. The knowledge of being a fool is there.
Krishnamurti: No, Madam, it is not only that, please look at it, it
is much deeper than that. I am hurt because you called me a fool.
Why should I be hurt?

Questioner: Because of the image I have of myself.
Krishnamurti: Which means I have an image of myself as not
being a fool. And when you call me a fool, or a blackguard, or a
whatever it is, I get hurt because of my image. Why do I have an
image about myself? As long as I have an image about myself I'm
going to be hurt.
Questioner: Why do I have to care about the image that the
other has of me, whatever that be?
Krishnamurti: The other has an image of me as a fool, or he has
the image of me as a great intellect - it's the same thing, you
follow? Now why do I have an image about myself?
Questioner: Because I don't like what I am. Krishnamurti: No,
first why do you have it? Because you don't like yourself as you
are? What are you? Have you looked at yourself without an image?
Let's be simple. I have an image about you as being very clever,
bright, intelligent, awake, enlightened - a tremendous image. And
comparing myself with you I am dull. Measuring myself against
you I find I am inferior - obviously. That makes me feel I am very
dull, very stupid, and from that feeling of inferiority, of stupidity, I
have many other problems. Now why do I compare myself with
you at all? Is it that we have been brought up from childhood to
compare? In schools we compare, through the giving of marks,
through examinations. The mother says, "Be as bright as your elder
brother." There is this terrible comparison going on all the time
throughout life. And if I don't compare, where am I? Am I dull? I
don't know. I have called myself dull in comparing myself with
you, who are not dull, but if I don't compare, what happens?
Questioner: I become myself.

Krishnamurti: What is yourself"? Just see the cycle we go
through, repeating these things over and over again without
understanding them. So I come back to this: why do I have to have
an image about myself - good, bad, noble, ignoble, ugly or dull.
Why do I have an image about anything?
Questioner: It's a means of conscious acting. A man who is
conscious and aware must automatically become involved in
comparison.
Krishnamurti: Sir, I am asking: why do I compare? Comparison
implies not only conflict but imitation, doesn't it?
Questioner: But surely it is necessary to evaluate.
Krishnamurti: Watch it please - comparison implies conflict and
imitation, doesn't it? That's one side of it. In comparing myself
with you I feel I am dull, therefore I must struggle to be as clever
as you are. There is conflict and I then imitate what you are. That's
implied in comparison: conflict and imitation. But also I see I must
compare between this cloth and that cloth, this house and that
house, measure whether you are tall or short, measure the distance
between here and another place. You follow? But why do I have an
image about myself? Because if I have an image about myself it's
going to be hurt.
Questioner: Perhaps this image doesn't exist at all.
Krishnamurti: That's right, go on, investigate it. Why do I have
an image about myself as something or nothing?
Questioner: I want to be secure, that depends on how secure the
image is.
Krishnamurti: You are saying that you are seeking security in
an image. Is that it? That image has been put toget thought. So you

find security in the image which thought has built, and in that
image thought is seeking security. Thought has created an image
because it wants security in that image, so thought is seeking
security in itself. Which is: thought is seeking security in the image
which it has built, and that image is the product of thought; thought
is memory, which is the past. So thought has built this image about
itself? No?
Questioner: Sir, may I ask what to do with education? Because
even parents start to compare their own children and say, "This
child is cleverer."
Krishnamurti: I know. Parents are the most dangerous human
beings! (Laughter) They destroy their children, because they are
uneducated.
So the image is built by thought and thought is seeking security;
so thought has invented an image in which it finds security, but it is
still thought and thought is the response of memory, of yesterday.
What has happened? Knowledge of yesterday has created this
image. How am I not to be hurt? Not being hurt implies not having
any kind of image - obviously. Now, how am I to prevent images?
- images of the future, of which I am going to be frightened.
Thought is time, thought is fear of the image of tomorrow in which
there is no certainty. How is the mind, or the brain, not to have
images at all and yet not be hurt? The moment it is hurt, it ixx to
have an image. And being hurt, it protects itself with another
image.
So my question is: apart from the physical aspect, where it has
to protect itself against danger, polluted air, wars, etc., where
protection is necessary - can the brain not be hurt at all? Which

means, not to have any kind of image. Not to be hurt implies
having no resistance. Having no resistance means having no image.
Not to be hurt means vitality, energy, and that energy is dissipated
when I have images. That energy is dissipated when I compare
myself with you, compare my image with your image. That energy
is dissipated in conflict, in trying to become your image, which I
have projected for myself. That energy is wasted when I am
imitating the image which I have projected about you. So the
dissipation of energy is this factor. And when I am energetic,
which can only take place when there is attention, I am not hurt. I
don't know whether you are following all this? Let's understand it
differently.
One observes that one is hurt. One is hurt because basically one
has an image about oneself. That image has been built through the
various forms of culture, education, civilization, tradition,
nationality, economic conditions and social injustice.
That image is the past and therefore knowledge. Thought whether it is my thought or the collective thought - has imprinted
on the brain this sense of comparing an image with another image.
The mother, the schoolteacher, the politician does it, as well as the
mythology of the Christians; the whole civilization is based on
building this image. And there it is, in the brain, which is thought.
Now one discovers, one understands, that as long as one has an
image, there must be hurt.
Questioner: The image is the hurt, isn't it?
Krishnamurti: So can the brain be free of all images and
therefore never be hurt? That means to be fr ee of the knowledge of
the past as image. Knowledge of the past is essential to speak a

language; but as long as there is knowledge as an image, put
together by thought, which is the "me" - which is the greatest
image - and as long as I have the greatest image in "me", you have
a perfect right to put pins into it. And you do!
So can the brain never be hurt? Sirs, to find this out for
yourselves and live a life in which the brain is never hurt! Then
only can you have relationship. But if in the relationship you are
hurting me and I am hurting you, it comes to an end. And if in that
relationship between you and me there is hurt and that relationship
comes to an end, then I go to find another relationship - divorce
you and join somebody else. And again there is going to be hurt.
We think by changing a relationship we are going to be completely
invulnerable. But all the time we are being hurt.
Questioner: If the images are gone, between what is the
relationship? Relationship means a relevant word, and if the
images are gone, what is the relationship between man and wife?
Krishnamurti: Why are you asking me? Find out if your image
has gone, not because you want to ask me a question which I
should answer. Find out if the images, which you have, have gone;
then you will find out what your relationship is with another. But if
I say, "It is love", it is just a theory. Throw it out, that has no
meaning. But if you said: "I know I am hurt, all my life I have been
hurt." Don't you know this? - a series of inward tears, a series of
anxieties. These images exist!
Our question is: can the brain nevcr be hurt at all? And that you
have to apply yourself to, not just talk about it. Go after it, say,
"Have I got an image?" Obviously you have, otherwise you and I
wouldn't be sitting here. And if you have an image, examine it, go

into it and see the futility of analysis, because that prevents you
from action. Whereas if you say now,"I move with the image", to
move with the image means xxe thought that is building this; and
thought is knowledge. So can the brain be full of knowledge in one
direction and have no knowledge in the other? That mcans
complete silence. You understand, Sir? To be completely silent,
and out of that silence to use knowledge. You won't see this.
Questioner: What place is there for established relationship? Is
there such a thing?
Krishnamurti: Go to the Registrar and get married. That
establishes legally a relationship, and what goes on, my God! And
what goes on also not legally! So it's your torture.
To come back, what is the relationship of thought to fear? We
said, thought springs from knowledge of the past, knowledge is the
past. In that knowledge thought has found security: I know my
house, I know you, I am this, I am conditioned or not conditioned.
I have asserted what I am in knowledge. But tomorrow I don't
know, I am afraid of tomorrow. And also I am afraid of the
knowledge which I have of the past, because I see there is also
tremendous insecurity. If I live in the past, as most of us do, I am
already dead and that feeling of living in the past is suffocating,
and I don't know how to get rid of it and I am fr ightened of that, as
I am frightened of tomorrow. So I am frightened of living and I am
frightened of dying. What am I to do with the fears I have? Or is
there only one fear. Apart from the physical fears and
psychosomatic fears, is there only one fear, taking different forms?
Questioner: Is it thefear of nothingness, of the void?
Krishnamurti: Is it the fear of not being? The fear of not having

any image: the being is the image, isn't it? Let's apply our minds
and see actually whether the mind can be free of fear, both of the
physical fears and the psychological fears which are much deeper,
more neurotic. Let's apply ourselves, put our teeth into it, because
one sees that when there is fear of any kind it is the most appalling
thing. One lives in darkness, in a sense of void, disassociated,
having no relationship, everything becomes ugly. Haven't you fear?
- not only of the past, but also of the future; not only the fears of
which one is conscious, but deep down.
Now when you look at this whole phenomenon of fear, at the
various forms of fear, physical and psychological, with all their
divisions, in all their varieties, when you see the whole structure of
fear, what is the root of it all? Unless I discover the root of it, I
shall go on manipulating the parts, modifying the parts. So I must
find the root of it. What do you think is the root of all fears? - not
just of one particular form of fear. Please don't answer me. Be sure
for yourself, what is the root of it, discover it, unfold it, look at it.
Questioner: Sir, I would like to say that as an exercise we
should hurt each other. I would like to hurt you, andyou should
hurt these people; because of the conditions here - Ifeel the whole
atmosphere is polite - you don't want to hurt these people.
Krishnamurti: The gentleman says, this atmosphere is polite, a
bore. r don't want to hurt you and you don't want to hurt me;
therefore it's a form of politeness and it doesn't amount to anything.
Is that so? I don't mind your hurting me.
Questioner (1): I think relationship is not just sitting here and
listening ! to you. I think if I hurt you, there would be a
relationship between you and me, because then I have destrayed

part of the image.
Questioner (2): That's nonsense! Is it possible for you to
continue, as we have so little time?
Krishnamurti: You see, Sir, it's not a reaction, he is telling you
something, he says, look: we have been through all this. We have
examined the images - you having one, I having one, you hurting
and I hurting, we've been through all that; it's not politeness.
Questioner: But you described images and we did not look into
the images.
Krishnamurti: You were supposed to. How do you know?
Questioner: Maybe the others did.
Krishnamurti: How do you know? You see, how do I know that
you have not washed away your images? It's my conceit which
says you have not. Who am I to tell you whether you have, or not.
It's up to you. So let's go back.
I want to find out about fear - not the parts of the various fears but I really want to find out the root of it. Is it "not being"? - which
is the "becoming", you follow? That is, "I am becoming
something", "I want to be something". I have been hurt and I want
to be free of hurts. All our life is this process of "becoming".
Aggression is part of this becoming. And the "not becoming" is an
immense fear; "not being" is a fear, isn't it? Is that the root of it?
Questioner: Sir, I try to find out the root offear. I see I can't
think about the fear, so the mind becomes silent so that I can
justfeel that fear; and then all Ifeel is a deep, inner tension; but I
can't get beyond that point.
Krishnamurti: But why is one tense about it? I just want to find
out. Why should I have any tension about it? Because if there is

tension I want to go beyond it, I am so eager, so greedy! Sir, just
look. We think, don't we, each one of us, in terms of becoming becoming enlightened, breaking down the images: "You don't
listen to my image", "I don't listen to your image" - you follow?
This whole process is a form of "becoming" or "being". When the
"being" is threatened - which is "not becoming" - there is fear.
Right?
What is there to become? I can understand that I can become
healthier, I can grow my hair longer, but psychologically, what is
there to become? What is becoming? Changing images? Changing
one image for another image? - obviously. But if I have no image
at all and I see the reason for not having one logically, I also see
the truth, that images prevent relationship, whether it is the hurt
image, or a pleasant image - it is both, obviously. If I have a
pleasant image about you, you are my friend, if I have an
unpleasant image about you, you are my enemy. So not to have
images at all! Work this out, apply it, not just accept it, but actually
apply it. Enquire and apply and live it. Then one finds - if you do
apply, do work at it - there is a mind, there is a brain, that can
never be hurt, because there is nothing to be hurt.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
VIII CHAPTER 5 7TH PUBLIC DIALOGUE
SAANEN 10TH AUGUST 1971 'INTELLIGENCE
AND THE RELIGIOUS LIFE'
Questioner (1): Can we discuss the observer and the observed and
their relation to awareness?
Questioner (2): May we discuss what it really means to lead a
religious life?
Questioner (3): Could we talk about intelligence and
meditation?
Krishnamurti; Now what is a religious life? In talking that over,
we shall come upon this question of the observer and the observed,
intelligence and meditation and the rest of it. I don't know if it
interests you at all to find out what religion means. Not the
accepted meaning of that word, the belief in some saviour, in some
form of God, in some ritual and so on, which is all propaganda and
for me has no value whatsoever - that is not a religious life. Are
you quite sure we all see that fact? You may not belong to any sect
or group, or any community that believes - or doesn't believe - in
God. That belief - or unbelief - in God is another form of fear: the
mind wanting some kind of security, certainty; because our life is
so uncertain, so confused, so meaningless, we want something to
believe in. So can we also put aside the hope that something
outside, a superior agency, exists? To enquire, all that must
obviously be put aside.
Thought can imagine anything - gods or no gods, angels or no
angels - it can produce every form of neurotic perception, idea and

conclusion. Knowing that intelligently, man then says: how can
thought be quiet, so that the mind is free to enquire? Thought is
capable of inventing, or imagining every form of conclusion, of
projecting an image in which the human mind finds security; that
security, that image, becomes an illusion - the Saviour, the
Brahma, the Atman, the experiences you have through various
forms of discipline and so on. So the problem is: can thought
become completely still? Some say you can make it still only
through a system which a teacher has invented through discipline
and control. Can a system, discipline, conformity, make the mind
really quiet? Or doesn't following a system, practising day after
day, make the mind mechanical? - and being mechanical, then you
can control it like any other machine. But the brain is not quiet, it
has been shaped and conditioned by the system which it has
practised. Such a brain, being mechanical, can be controlled and
thinks such control is quietness, stillness. Obviously it is not.
Please don't just accept what the speaker is saying. But do we all
see the necessity of having a completely quiet mind? For when the
mind is quiet it can see and hear much more, see things as they are
- not invent, not imagine.
So can the mind become completely still without coercion,
without compulsion, without discipline? - discipline being will,
resistance, suppression, conformity, fitting into a pre-established
pattern. If you do that, you are forcing the mind through conflict to
conform to the pattern established by the system. So discipline in
the ordinary sense of the word is out. The word discipline means to
learn; not to conform, not to suppress,not to control, but to learn.
Can the whole structure of the brain and the mind be completely

quiet without any form of distortion by will, by desire, by thought?
That is the problem and knowing it, people have said, "It is not
possible." Therefore they went in the other direction, used control,
and discipline, did all kinds of tricks. In Zen meditation they sit,
paying attention, watching and if they go to sleep they are struck to
keep awake. This kind of tremendous discipline is mechanical and
therefore controllable; it is done in the hope of achieving an
experience which will be true.
In his search for some super-transcendental experience man has
said: the mind must be absolutely quiet to receive something which
it has never experienced before; he has never tasted the smell, the
quality of it, therefore the mind must be still. And they have said
there is only one way of making the mind still: to force it. When
there is the operation of will in bringing about a quiet mind, there
is distortion. A mind which is distorted cannot possibly see "what
is". Are we doing this? - that is, not exercising will, not forcing the
mind to be mechanical through any form of discipline or system, in
which are included all the tricks of Yoga - which is totally wrong.
Those people who teach physical exercises make it into a perfect
racket.
So seeing all that, can the mind become completely still - the
mind and the brain, because it is very important that the brain be
completely quiet. The brain, which is the result of time, with all its
knowledge, experience and so on, is always active to every
stimulus, responding to every impression, to every influence, and
can that brain also be quiet?
Questioner: Why should it be quiet? It has a lot of different
functions.

Krishnamurti: It must be active within the field of knowledge,
because that is its function. If I did not know that a cobra was a
most poisonous snake I would play with it and get killed. The
knowledge that it is poisonous is self-protection, therefore
knowledge must exist - technologically, in every way. That
knowledge has been acquired, but we are not interfering with it, we
don't say, "You must not have knowledge", on the contrary, you
must have knowledge of the world, of the facts. But that
knowledge has to be used impersonally.
So the brain has to be quiet; if it makes any movement, its
movement will be in the direction of security, because it can only
function in security, whether that security be neurotic, rational, or
irrational. The brain has to have that quality of sensitivity so that it
can function in knowledge, fully, completely, efficiently, sanely,
healthily, and not from the point of view of "My country", "For my
people", "For my family", "For me". But also there must be that
quality of sensitivity which makes the brain completely quiet - that
is the problem. I have explained, described the problem, but it has
nothing whatsoever to do with the fact. The fact is whether you,
listening to this, have put aside every form of organized belief,
every form of wanting more and more experience. Because if you
are desirous of wanting more experience, then the desire is in
operation, which is will.
So the fact is, if you are interested in pursuing a religious life,
you have to do this, which means leading a really serious life - no
drugs, all that is out. And also there must be no seeking or
demanding experience. Because when you are seeking experience transcendental, or whatever you like to call it - you are seeking

because you are bored with the daily experiences of life and you
want to have an experience which is beyond this. And when you
are experiencing what one calls a transcendental, or a different
level of experience, in that there is the experiencer and the
experienced; there is the observer who is experiencing and the
observed which is the experience. So there is division, there is
conflict: you want more and more experience. That also must be
completely set aside, because when you are enquiring, experience
has no place.
One sees clearly that it is absolutely necessary that the brain, the
mind, the whole system, the organism, must be quiet. As you can
see, if you want to listen to something like music, your body, your
mind is still - you are listening. And if you are listening to
somebody who is talking, your body becomes quiet. When you
want to understand something, the mind, the brain, the body, the
whole organism, become quiet naturally. Look how you are all
sitting quietly! You are not forcing yourself to sit quietly, because
you are interested to find out. That very interest is the flame that
makes the mind, the brain, the body, quiet.
Now what relationship has meditation to a quiet mind? The
word meditation means to measure: that is the root meaning of it.
Thought alone can measure, thought is measurement. Please, this is
important to understand. One really should not use the word
"meditation" at all. Thought is based on measure, and the
cultivation of thought is the action of measurement technologically and in life. Without measurement there could be no
modern civilization. To go to the moon you must have the infinite
capacity to measure.

Although measurement is essential, is obviously necessary, how
can thought - which is measurable, which is measure - not enter?
Let us put it round the other way. When there is this absolute
quietness of the mind, of the whole organism, including the brain,
measurement as thought ceases. Then one can enquire if there is
such a thing as the immeasurable. The measurable is thought, and
as long as thought is functioning the immeasurable cannot be
understood. Therefore it has been said: control, beat down thought.
And the whole Asiatic world went into the immeasurable,
neglecting the measurable. You are following this?
Still using the word "meditation", what relationship has that to a
very still mind? Can thought be really quiet, which means for the
body, the mind and the heart to be in complete harmony? - yet
seeing the truth that thought is measurable and that all the
knowledge which thought has produced is essential. And also
seeing the truth that thought, which is measurable, can never
understand the immeasurable.
So if one has gone as far as that, then what relationship has this
quality of the immeasurable with daily life? Are you all asleep?
Are you all being mesmerized by the speaker?
We know thought is measure, we know all the mischief that
thought has done in human life, the misery, the confusion, the
division between people. "You believe and I don't believe," "Your
God is not my God: thought has brought about havoc in the world.
Thought is also knowledge, so thought is necessary. To see the
truth of that, and that thought can never investigate the
immeasurable, is to see that thought can never experience it as an
experiencer and the experienced. So when thought is absolutely

quiet, then there is a state, or a dimension, in which the
immeasurable has its own movement. Now what relationship has
that to daily life? Because if it has no relationship, then I shall live
a life very carefully measuring my morality, my activity, according
to the measurement of thought, but it will be very limited.
So what is the relationship of the unknown to the known? What
is the relationship between the measurable and that which is not
measurable? There must be a liaison: and that is intelligence.
Intelligence has nothing whatsoever to do with thought. You may
be very clever, very good at arguing, very learned. You may have
experienced, lived a tremendous life, been all over the world,
investigating, searching, looking, accumulating a great deal of
knowledge, practised Zen or Hindu meditation. But all that has
nothing whatsoever to do with intelligence. Intelligence comes into
being when the mind, the heart, and the body are really
harmonious.
Therefore - follow this, Sirs - the body must be highly sensitive.
Not gross, not overindulging in eating, drinking, sex, and all the
rest that makes the body coarse, dull, heavy. You have to
understand all that. The very seeing the fact of that makes you eat
less, gives the body its own intelligence. If there is an awareness of
the body, which is not being forced, then the body becomes very,
very sensitive, like a beautiful instrument. The same with the heart;
that is, it is never hurt and can never hurt another. Not to hurt and
not to be hurt, that is the innocency of the heart. A mind which has
no fear, which demands no pleasure - not that you cannot enjoy the
beauty of life, the beauty of trees, of a beautiful face, looking at
children, at the flow of water, at the mountains and the green

pastures - there is great delight in that. But that delight, when
pursued by thought, becomes pleasure.
The mind has to be empty to see clearly. So the relationship
between the immeasurable, the unknown and the known, is this
intelligence, which has nothing whatsoever to do with Buddhism,
with Zen, with me or with you; it has absolutely nothing to do with
authority or tradition. Have you got that intelligence? That is the
only point that matters. That intelligence will operate in this world
morally. Morality then is order, which is virtue. Not the virtue or
the morality of society, which is totally immoral.
So that intelligence brings about order, which is virtue, a thing
that is living, that is not mechanical. Therefore you can never
practise being good, you can never practise trying to become
humble. When there is that intelligence, it naturally brings about
order and the beauty of order. This is a religious life, not all the
fooling around with it.
Listening to the speaker have you understood this? - not
verbally or intellectually, but actually seen the truth of this? If you
see the truth of it, it will act. If you see the truth that a snake is
dangerous, you act. If you see the danger of a precipice, the fact,
the truth of it, you act. If you see the truth of arsenic, of poison,
you act. So do you see this, or do you still live in the world of
ideas? If you live in the world of ideas, of conclusions, then that's
not truth, that's just a projection of thought.
So that is the real question: listening to this, as you have for the
last three weeks, in which we have talked about all the varieties of
human existence, of suffering, pain and pleasure, of sex and
immorality, social injustice, national divisions, wars, and all the

rest - do you see the truth of this, and therefore is there that
intelligence which operates? - not "me" operating. When you say,
"I must be myself", which is the slogan or the cliche of the modern
generation, when you examine these words, "I must be myself",
what is myself? A lot of words, a lot of conclusions, traditions,
reactions, memories, a bundle of the past; and yet you say, "I want
to be myself", which is too childish.
So having listened to all this, is there the awakening of that
intelligence? And if there is that awakening of intelligence, then it
will operate, then you don't have to say, "What am I to do?"
Perhaps there have been a thousand persons here during these three
weeks who have listened. If they really live that, do you know what
is going to happen? We should change the world. We shall be the
salt of the earth.
Questioner: Do I understand correctly, that for thought to cease
the mind has to see deeply the truth of the poison of seeking
security. Is that what you said?
Krishnamurti: Partly, Sir.
Questioner:The difficulty seems to be, that this part doesn't see,
so the mind doesn't see it, and in order for the mind to see
something there has to be quiet - it seems like a vicious circle. The
difficulty is that it has not seen it.
Krishnamurti: No, Sir. First of all, why should a mind be quiet,
why shouldn't it go on chattering? When the mind is chattering,
you can't see anything very clearly, can you? You can't listen to
anybody clearly. If you are looking at a mountain, seeing its
beauty, your mind naturally has to be quiet; which means you have
to give attention to that moment, to seeing. That's all. That is, if

you listen to the fact that thought is measure, that thought has
divided human beings, that thought has brought about wars - if you
see the truth of it - not the explanation, the justification - you just
see the fact of what thought has done. Obviously to see that fact
your mind must be quiet. So it is not a vicious circle at all, Sir.
Questioner: May I ask you a question? You often talk about the
beauty of the mountains and the stillness of the mind when looking
at the beauty of a cloud. Can the mind be still when looking at
something horrible?
Krishnamurti: Just listen carefully, observe the dark and the
light, the slum and the non-slum. Can you watch that? Can there be
an awareness in which these divisions don't exist? Is there an
awareness in which the division between poverty and riches does
not exist? Not the fact that there is not the division, with all its
injustice, immorality, all that - but an awareness in which this
division doesn't exist? That is, can the mind observe the beauty of
the hill and the squalor, and not prefer, or incline to one, opposed
to the other? That means an awareness in which choice doesn't
exist. You can do this. Not that poverty should go on - you would
do something, politically, socially and so on; but the mind could be
freed from division, from this classical division between the rich
and the poor, between beauty and ugliness, from the opposites and
all the rest of it.
Questioner: I should like to ask you, is there a difference for
you between thought and speculation?
Krishnamurti: Why should there be a difference between
thought and speculation? Who is speculating - isn't thought
speculating? Isn't thought theorizing that there is God, that there is

no God, about how many angels can sit on a pinhead, and so on? It
is the whole business ofthought to speculate - there is no
difference, it is the same.
Questioner: One can be aware objectively of a tree, of a
Fountain, of a person. Can thought observe its own movement? Is
there awareness of itself, and is one aware of being aware?
Krishnamurti: Yes: is there an awareness of thought watching
itself?
Questioner: I don't like the word "watch".
Krishnamurti: All right: an awareness of itself. Now wait a
minute, just look. Have you understood the question? You can be
aware of the tree, of the hill, of your sitting there; there is an
awareness of that. Is there an awareness of being aware?
You can be aware of the tree, the cloud, the colour of your shirt,
and you can be aware objectively. You can also be aware of how
your thought is operating. But is there an awareness of being
aware?
When you are aware of a tree, as an observer, is that awareness?
The tree is there and you are aware of that tree. You then become
the observer and that becomes the observed, and you say, "That's
not it." In that there is a division, as the observer and the observed.
It is the same with the cloud, the same with you sitting there, and
the person speaking, sitting on a platform and observing. In that
too there is a division. In this too there is the observer watching
you, the observed; in that there is division. One can be aware of
thought. I am going step by step. Being aware of thought, in that
also there is a division; the one who is aware separating himself
from thought.

Now you are asking a question, which is: does awareness know,
or is it aware of itself, without an observer? Of course not, the
moment there is no observer, there is no awareness of being aware.
Obviously, Sir, that's the whole point! The moment I am aware that
I am aware, I'm not aware. Remain with it, Sir, for two minutes
remain with it! The moment I am aware that I am humble, humility
is not. The moment I am aware that I am happy, happiness is not.
So if I am aware that I am aware, then that is not awareness; in
that there is division between the observer and the observed. Now
you are asking a question, which is: is there an awareness in which
division as the observer and the observed comes to an end?
Obviously awareness means that - awareness means that the
observer is not. Questioner: Can one be aware of the tree without
the observer, without that space?
Krishnamurti: Look at it. When you look at a tree, there is space
between you and the tree. Wait Sir, we are going step by step.
When you look at that tree, there is a distance between you and the
tree, there is the space, there is division. That division takes place
when there is the observer who has an image of that tree as the oak,
or the pine. So the knowledge, the image, separates the observer fr
om the observed, from the tree. Please look at it. Can you look at
that tree without the image? If you look at that tree without the
image, without saying, "That is an oak", "That is beautiful or not
beautiful", without like or dislike, then what takes place? What
takes place when there is no observer, but only the observed? Go
on, Sir, tell me what takes place - I'm not going to tell you!
Questioner (1): There comes about union.
Questioner (2): Oneness.

Krishnamurti; Oneness means the same thing.
Questioner: Awareness.
Krishnamurti: No don't invent, don't speculate.
Questioner: When I am aware of the tree I have a feeling...
Krishnamurti: I'm coming to that, Sir. Please listen to it step by
step. I said to you: when you look ordinarily at a tree, there is the
division between you and the tree. You are the observer and the
tree is the observed. That's a fact. You, with your image, with your
prejudices, with your hopes and all the rest of it - that is the
observer. Therefore as long as that exists as the observer, there
must be division between you and the tree. When the observer is
not, but only the object, what takes place? - don't imagine, do it!
Questioner (1): There is stillness... thought does not work any
more.
Questioner (2): We become the tree. Krishnamurti: You become
the tree - my God, I hope not! Become the elephant! (Laughter) Do
please listen. Do it. Look at a tree and see if you can look at it
without any image. That is fairly easy. But to look at yourself
without an image, to look at yourself without the observer, that's
much more difficult. Because what you see is unpleasant or
pleasant, you want to change it, you want to control it, you want to
shape it, you want to do something about it.
So can you look at yourself without the observer, as you can if
you look at the tree? Which means to look at yourself with
complete attention. When there is complete attention there is no
image. It is only when your mind is thinking, "I wish I had a better
`me"', or "I am going to do so and so" - then when you are looking,
there is inattention.

Questioner: Am I wrong if I say that we are in a state of
awareness all the time? It's thought that invents the division.
Krishnamurti: Oh, no! That is another speculation of thought,
that we are aware all the time. We are in a state of awareness only
at moments, then we go off to sleep. The moments when we go off
to sleep, the moments when we are inattentive, that is what is
important, not when we are aware.
Questioner: Are we aware of the infinite affection you express
when you translate intelligence into human life?
Krishnamurti: It's up to you, Sir!
Questioner: When I am aware of my image, and my image goes,
then isn't that awareness in itself?
Krishnamurti: When I am aware of my image, does the image
exist? It doesn't.
Questioner: Then that is awareness in itself.
Krishnamurti: That's right, awareness in itself without any
choice. Sir, what is important in all this, is not what one has heard,
but what one is learning. Learning is not accumulation of
knowledge. When you go away from here, you will have various
ideas about awareness, love, truth, fear and all the rest of it. Those
very ideas are going to prevent learning. But if you are aware a
little bit, then you are learning and then intelligence can operate
through learning in daily life.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
IX CHAPTER 1 1ST PUBLIC TALK
BROCKWOOD PARK 4TH SEPTEMBER 1971
THE RELATIONSHIP TO AWARENESS OF
THOUGHT AND THE IMAGE
I THINK IT would be worth while to talk over together the
question of violence, which is becoming worse and spreading right
through the world; this really a part of the whole human
conditioning. Can man ever be free either of the superficial social
conditioning of a particular culture, or of the much deeper
conditioning, which is the whole collective sorrow, the violence,
the destructive despairs and their activities of which most of us are
unconscious? It is like a cloud which one has inherited, in which
one lives. Apparently one finds it tremendously difficult to free
oneself from it all.
Wherever one goes, all over the world, one observes that the
superficial cultures don't penetrate very deeply into human
consciousness. But the great clouds of sorrow - I don't like to use
the word "evil" - that destructive violence, the antagonisms and
conflicts seem to be deeply rooted in all of us. Can one be utterly
free of this? If that is essential, then how is one to set about it?
Superficially we may be highly cultured, polite, slightly
indifferent, but deep down I think most of us are unaware that there
is a great inheritance of this vast, complex conflict, misery and
fear. If one is at all conscious of it one asks: is it possible to be
entirely free of it, so that the mind is a totally different kind of
instrument? I do not know if you have thought about this at all - or

perhaps it seems that the superficial conditioning is so important
that one is always struggling against it. If one has been through that
and has put it away then there are all these deep layers which are
for the most part unconscious. How is one to become aware of
those? Is it at all possible to be completely rid of them?
Perhaps we could discuss how to be aware of these terrible
things which man has inherited or cultivated. Whatever the
explanations be, the fact is that we are deeply violent, that we are
caught in sorrow. There is this cloud of fear and obviously this
brings about a great deal of mischief and confusion in action. I
think that is fairly obvious. How is one to be aware of all this, and
is it possible to go beyond it?
The organized religions throughout the world have laid down
certain rules, disciplines, attitudes and beliefs. But have they
resolved human suffering and the deep-rooted anxieties, guilts and
all the rest of it? So we can put aside all religious beliefs, hopes
and fears. One is aware of what is taking place in the world, of the
nature of religious oganizations with their heads, gurus and
saviours and all their mythology. If one has set aside all that,
because one has understood it and seen the futility, the falseness of
it and is free of it, then certain facts remain: sorrow, violence, fear
and great anxiety.
If I am conscious of all that, how am I to be free of it, so that I
have a different kind of brain, a different kind of action, a different
attitude towards life, a different way of living? The more
intelligent, enquiring and intellectually aware one is of this, the
more serious one becomes and there is also the demand that the
mind must be totally free of all this mess that human beings have

created and carry about with them endlessly. I think that is the
basic problem; not that there is not social injustice and poverty,
wars, violence, the division between nationalities and so on. All
that can be solved, I feel, when human beings really understand
this whole problem of existence. Then they can tackle all the
confusion and wars from a different dimension.
The human mind wants to find that dimension. It has to find it
to solve all this misery. If you are serious, not playing with words,
speculating or indulging in theoretical suppositions, ideas and
hypotheses, but are actually confronted not only with your own,
but with this human suffering, how are you to end all this? The
demand for constant security is much more a demand for
psychological security, which is much deeper than physiological
security; because we want psychological security, to give over all
our thoughts and hope to some teacher, to some saviour, to some
belief. How shall I, knowing all this, understand and be free of this
constant effort, struggle and misery ?
How are we to be aware of all that? What does this awareness
or perception mean? How do I know that I am in sorrow? - not
only I, but every human being in the world, of which I am part;
how do I know that there is this sorrow? Is it a verbal recognition
or is it an acceptance of an idea that there is sorrow of which I am
part? Or is there a conscious awareness that sorrow is a fact? When
I say to myself: there is tremendous sorrow in the world, of which I
am part - as I am the world and the world is me - that is a fact. It is
not an idea, not a sentiment, not an emotional assertion; it is an
absolute fact that I am the world and the world is me. Because we
have made this world we are responsible for it. All my thoughts,

my activities, my fears, my hopes, are the hopes and fears of the
world. There is no division between the world and me. The
community is me, the culture is me and I am that culture; so there
is no division. I don't know if you see and feel that?
Knowing that I am the world and that there must be a radical
revolution in the world - not through bombs, that leads nowhere - I
realize there must be a revolution in the very psyche and in the
mind itself. So that one lives differently, thinks differently, acts in
a totally different manner altogether. How am I to free the mind
that is responsible for all this? - the mind being thought. It is
thought that has brought about the division between people, the
wars, the structure of religious belief. And thought has also put
together the technology that makes for the convenience of
everyday existence: electricity, the railway, the technological
knowledge that enables one to go to the moon; it is thought that has
done all this. This thought which has gathered so much
information, so much knowledge, how is it to be free from the
whole structure and nature of sorrow and fear? - and yet function
efficiently, with sanity, in the field of knowledge without bringing
about division and antagonism between man and man. You see the
problem? How then is thought to prevent this division? Because
where there is division there is conflict, not only outwardly but
inwardly. Am I making the problem clear? - it's your problem, it's
the problem of human being. One sees what thought has done,
being cunning, extraordinarily capable, it has gathered
technological knowledge which cannot possibly be put aside;
thought must be exercised to function at all. And yet thought has
brought about violence, and thought is not love. So one has to have

the clarity of thought in function, and yet be aware that thought
does breed all the misery in the world. How can we be aware of the
whole implication of thought - which is the measurable - and also
of a dimension in which thought as the measurable does not exist at
all? First, is it clear what thought has done in the world, both
beneficial and destructive? How is thought to function efficiently,
healthily and not create division between people?
The collective memory of man responds as thought - which is
the past. It may project into the future, but it still has its roots in the
past and from there it functions. We see that in operation and we
say that is necessary. But why does thought divide people? Why
should I be conditioned as a Muslim - which is the result of
thought - and you be conditioned as a Communist, also as a result
of thought? Some people think that only violence can produce a
sociological change, and others say: that is not the way. So thought
is always creating divisions and where there is division there is
conflict. So what is the function of thought?
Knowing that thought can only function in the field of
knowledge, can thought invent or come upon a different dimension
in which there is no division created by thought? Personally, I am
very interested in this, because I have seen all over the world that
thought has created such marvellous things and yet has brought
about such misery, such confusion, such an enormous amount of
sorrow. Can thought completely operate in one direction and be
totally silent in another, so that it does not create a division? After
having put that question to myself - and I hope you are putting it to
yourself - is it possible for thought to say, "I won't go beyond the
technological world, knowledge and daily existence", and not enter

into that dimension in which there is no division? Is it possible for
thought to separate itself like that or are we putting the wrong
question altogether? Can thought see its own limitations and bring
about a different intelligence? If thought sees its own limitation, is
there not a different kind of intelligence in operation? Then is there
not an awakening of intelligence which is above and beyond
thought?
Questioner: When thought is seeing itself, that must not be
thinking.
Krishnamurti: I don t know, Sir.
Questioner: Hasn't thought come up with systems to destroy
itself?
Krishnamurti: First see our difficulty, don't let's find an easy
answer, see the enormous implications in this. Man has lived by
thought. We exercise thought every day, every minute. We must
have thought; without it there is no action, you can't live. You can't
destroy thought. To destroy thought implies a thought which is
superior and says "I must destroy my lower thought" - it is all
within the field of thought. This is what the Indians have done.
They have said: thought is very limited, there is a superior thought,
the Atman, the Brahman, the thing above; keep thought silent and
then the other will operate. The very assertion of that is thought,
isn't it? Here you say "The soul" - it is still part of thought. So
thought has produced this extraordinary world of technology,
which thought uses for the convenience of human beings and for
their destruction. It is thought that has invented the saviours, the
myths, the gods; it is thought that has produced violence, that
becomes jealous, anxious, fearful.

So is there a field which is not measurable by thought? Can that
field operate within the field of thought, without thought breaking
up into fragmentations? If thought is operating all the time, then
the mind is functioning with the knowledge which is the past.
Knowledge is the past - I can't have knowledge of tomorrow, and
knowledge is thought. If the only way to live is always within the
field of thought, then the mind can never be free and man must
always live in sorrow, in fear, in division, therefore in conflict.
Realizing that, man has said there must be an outside agency - as
God - who will help me to overcome all this fragmentation of
thought. But that God, that Atman - or other forms of hope - is still
the invention of thought not finding security in this world, which
invents or believes or projects an idea which it calls God, which is
secure. I see this. If thought is to be the only field in which human
beings can live, then they are doomed. This is not my invention,
this is what is actually going on.
Have I made the problem clear? The human mind demands
freedom from guilt, suffering, confusion, of these endless wars and
violence, and thought cannot produce freedom. It can invent the
idea of freedom, but that is not freedom. So the human mind must
find the answer. It can only do that when it has understood the
nature of thinking and has seen its capacity and has found a state of
the immeasurable in which thought does not function at all. This is
what is called meditation. People have done this; but again, their
meditation is part of the furthering of thought. They say "I must sit
quietly, my thoughts must be controlled." Knowing the limitation
of thought, they say "I must discipline it", "I must hold it in check,
not let it wander". They discipline themselves tremendously, but

they have not got that other dimension, because thought cannot
enter into that.
The really serious people have enquired deeply into this. And
yet, thought has been their major instrument and therefore they
have never solved this problem. They have invented things, they
have speculated. And poor fools like us accept these speculations,
the philosophies, the teachers, the whole gamut of it. Obviously
there must be a different kind of meditation, a different kind of
perception, that is seeing and not evaluating. To see the operations
of thought, all its inward and outward movement without giving it
any direction or forcing it in any way, just to observe it completely
without any choice, that is a different kind of perception. We see,
but we always give it a direction. We say "This must not be", "This
should be", "I shall overcome it". All that is the old way of
responding to any action, feeling or idea. But to observe without
any direction, without any pressure, without any distortion - is that
possible at all? If I can see myself as I am without any
condemnation or saying "I'll keep this and I'll reject that", then
perception has a different quality. Then it becomes a living thing,
not the repetitive pattern of the past. So in the very act of listening,
as you are doing now, you see the truth that to really perceive there
must be no directive or persuasion or compulsion. In that
observation, you will see that thought does not enter at all. Which
means, in that perception, in that seeing, there is complete
attention. Where there is no attention there is a distortion. Now w.
hen you are listening to this, if you see the truth of it, that acts.
Questioner: Sir, in that state one sees oneself absolutely
powerless and also amoral, and thought always feels and knows its

own power. Thought always enters where there is interest, fear and
anxiety.
Krishnamurti: Sir, isn't fear and anxiety the result of thought? thought has produced fear!
Questioner: Sometimes it comes unexpectedly.
Krishnamurti: That may be, but whether it is unexpected or not,
it's thought that has produced fear - no? Thought has produced this
immense sorrow.
Questioner: What about children's fears?
Krishnamurti: Surely, isn't that based on their lack of security?
Children need complete security and the parents cannot give it
because they are interested in their own little selves. They are
quarrelling, they are ambitious, so they cannot give the security the
child demands - which is love.
So we come back to the same question. Thought has produced
fear, there is no question about it. Thought has produced the aching
loneliness in oneself, thought has said "I must fulfil, I must be, I
am little, I must be big". Thought has brought about jealousy,
anxiety, guilt. Thought is that guilt. Not: thought makes for guilt,
thought is guilt. How can I observe myself and the world, of which
I am part, without any interference of thought in that observation,
so that out of the observation a different action can come which
does not produce fear, regrets and all the rest of it. So I must learn
to observe myself and the world and my actions quite differently.
There must be a learning of observation in which thought does not
interfere at all because the moment thought interferes it leads to
distortion, it becomes biased. Perception is m the present; you can't
perceive tomorrow. You perceive now, and when thought

interferes in that perception - thought being the response of the past
- it must distort the present; this is logical.
Questioner: Surely, to be aware we have to think.
Krishnamurti: Wait, look at it. What does awareness mean? I
am aware that you are sitting there and that I am sitting up here, I
am aware that I am sitting on a chair etc. Then thought says "I am a
better person than somebody who is sitting below, because I am
talking". Thought gives me prestige - do you follow? Is that
awareness, or is it merely the continuous movement of thought?
Can you see a tree without the operation of thought, without the
image of the tree? - the image being thought that says: that is an
oak.
In observing a tree what takes place? There is the space between
the observer and the tree, there is distance; then there is the
botanical knowledge, the like or dislike of that tree. I have an
image of a tree and that image looks at that tree; is there a
perception without the image? The image is thought; thought is the
knowledge of that tree. When there is perception with an image,
there is no direct perception of the tree. Is itpossible to look at the
tree without the image? That is fairly simple, but it becomes much
more complex when I look at myself without any image about
myself. Can there be an observation of myself without any image?
I am full of my images. I am this, I am not that, I should be this, I
should not be that, I must become, I must not become - do you
follow? Those are all images and I am looking at myself with one
of the images - not with the whole group of images.
So what is looking? If there is no image then what is seeing? If I
have no images at all about myself - which one has to go into very

deeply - then what is there to see? There is absolutely nothing to
see, and one is frightened of that. That is: one is absolutely
nothing. But we can't face that, therefore we have those images
about ourselves.
The human mind demands freedom. Freedom is essential, it is
even demanded politically, but you don't demand freedom from all
images. Thought has created these images for various sociological,
economic and cultural resows. These images are measurable: the
greater, the lesser. One asks: can thought observe without
distortion? Obviously it can't. There is a distorting factor in
thought, because thought is the response of the past. Is there an
observation without the interference of thought? - that means
without the interference of any image. You can find this out; it's
not a question of just accepting or believing. You can look at your
wife or your husband, the tree, the cloud, or the person sitting next
to you, without any image.
Questioner: Is there such a thing as an unconscious image one
might not be aware of?
Krishnamurti: Yes, there is, of course. Please listen to my
question: how am I to be aware of the many unconscious images
that I have stored up?
Questioner: Krishnaji, as long as one is trying to be aware, one
creates things to be aware of.
Krishnamurti: That is what I am saying. You cannot try to be
aware, you cannot determine to be aware; to be aware is not the
result of exercising will. Either you see or you don't see, either you
listen to what we are talking about now, or you don't listen. But if
you listen with your image, then of course you don't listen at all.

The question is really very interesting. I can understand the
conscious images, the superficial knowledge that I have, that is
fairly simple and clear. But how am I to be aware of the deep,
hidden images which have such a powerful influence on the whole
way of life?
Questioner: We find out by how we behave, by how these
images come up, sometimes in sleep.
Krishnamurti: Which means: through my behaviour I begin to
discover the unconscious images that have been stored up - one
image after the other, you follow? I behave towards you differently
than towards another, because you are more powerful, you have
greater prestige than the other man. Therefore my image of you is
greater and I despise the other; so it means going through one
image after another. Is there a central fact that creates these images
consciously as well as deeply? If I can find that out, then I don't
have to go through image after image, or discover the images
through dreams.
Through my behaviour I discover my unconscious images;
that's a form of analysis, isn't it? Will analysis resolve these
images? These images are created by thought, and analysis is
thought. Through thought I hope to destroy the images that thought
has created, so I am caught in a vicious circle. How do I deal with
this? Are your images revealed through dreams? Isn't that another
form of analysis? Why should you dream at all? Dreams are a
continuation of my daily activity, aren't they? I lead rather a
confused life - uncertain, miserable, lonely, frightened, comparing
myself with somebody else who is more beautiful, more intelligent;
that is my life during the waking hours and when I sleep, all that

goes on. I dream of all the things I have been through; it is the
continuation of how I have been living during the daytime. If there
is a revelation of myself through dreams, that is a form of analysis.
Therefore I am depending on dreams to reveal the hidden images,
and the dependence on dreams makes me less and less awake
during the waking hours - no?
Questioner: Thought and sub-thought create images and these
are useful on a certain level.
Krishnamurti: We have said that, there are useful images which
must function, which we must have, there are highly dangerous
images which one must totally abolish - obviously. That is what
this whole discussion is about.
Questioner: Is there not only one question? - not whether
thought can be silent when necessary but: can there be only
silence?
Krishnamurti: That means, Sir: can there be silence from which
thought can operate, doesn't it?
Questioner: It is not a question whether thought can operate or
not, but can there be only silence? Krishnamurti: Can thought be
completely silent? Who is putting that question? Is thought putting
that question?
Questioner: Obviously.
Krishnamurti: So thought is asking itself whether it can be
quiet.
How will it find out? Can it do anything to be silent? It can't,
can it? Can thought say to itself: I must be quiet? That is not being
quiet! Then what is silence which is not the product of thought? Is
there a silence which is not the result of thought? Which means,

can thought come to an end by itself, without asking to come to an
end? Isn't that what is implied when you listen to something, when
you see clearly? When you are completely attentive, in that
attention there is silence, isn't there? Complete attention means
your body, your nerves, everything is attentive. Then in that
attention the observer as thought does not exist.
Questioner: That only happens in moments of great danger.
Krishnamurti: You mean to say when there is a crisis. Must one
live in crises all the time? What an appalling idea, isn't it? In order
to be quiet I must have a series of crises and thereby hope to be
silent. That's too complicated!
Questioner: May I say that silence happens from within.
Krishnamurti: How does it happen? Can one function from
silence - you follow? Please put that question: first of all, what is
silence? How does it come? Is there a functioning, that is living a
daily life out of silence? I can't assert that there is an awareness all
the time, I don't know, you don't know.
Questioner: But it seems to be there, it just changes all the time.
Krishnamurti: We only know one thing: that thought is
perpetually in operation. And when thought is in operation there is
no silence, there is no awareness, as we pointed out. Awareness, or
perception, implies a state of seeing in which there is no image
whatsoever. Until I find out that it is possible to see without any
image, I can't state anything else. I can't state that there is an
awareness, there is a silence. Is it possible for me, in daily life, to
observe my wife, my child, everything around me, without a
shadow of an image? Find out. Then out of that attention there is
silence. That attention is silence. And it is not the result of practice,

which is again thought.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
IX CHAPTER 2 2ND PUBLIC TALK
BROCKWOOD PARK 12TH SEPTEMBER 1971
'THE MEDITATIVE MIND AND THE
IMPOSSIBLE QUESTION'
AS ONE TRAVELS over the world and observes the appalling
conditions of poverty and the ugliness of man's relationship to
man, it becomes obvious that there must be a total revolution. A
different kind of culture must come into being. The old culture is
almost dead and yet we are clinging to it. Those who are young
revolt against it, but unfortunately have not found a way, or a
means, of transforming the essential quality of the human being,
which is the mind. Unless there is a deep psychological revolution,
mere reformation on the periphery will have little effect. This
psychological revolution - which I think is the only revolution - is
possible through meditation.
Meditation is the total release of energy, and that is what we are
going to talk over together this morning. The root meaning of that
word is to measure. The whole Western world is based on the idea
of measurement, but in the East they have said, "Measurement is
maya, illusion, therefore one must find the immeasurable." So the
two drifted apart culturally, socially, intellectually and religiously.
Meditation is quite a complex problem, we have to go into it
slowly and approach it from different angles, bearing in mind all
the time that a psychological revolution is absolutely necessary for
a different kind of world, a different kind of society, to come into
being. I do know how strongly you feel about this. Probably most

of us, being bourgeois, comfortable with our little incomes, our
family and so on, would rather remain as we are and not be
disturbed. But events, technology, and all those things that are
happening in the world, are producing great changes outwardly.
Yet inwardly most of us remain more or less as we have been for
centuries. That revolution can only take place at the very centre of
our being and requires a great abundance of energy; meditation is
the release of that total energy and we are going to talk that over.
We have got a great many ideas about what meditation is and
what it should be; we import it from the East, or interpret it
according to our own particular religious inclination, as
contemplation, acceptance, prayer, keeping the mind still or open we have all kinds of fanciful ideas about it. And especially lately,
people have come from India propagating meditations of various
forms.
First of all, how is one to have this quality of energy which is
without friction? We know mechanical energy, which is friction
mechanically, and the friction in us which produces energy through
conflict, through resistance, through control and all the rest of it.
So there is a kind of energy caused by mechanical friction. Is there
another kind of energy which has no friction whatsoever and is
therefore completely free and immeasurable? I think meditation is
the discovery of that. Unless one has great abundance of energy,
not only physically but much more so psychologically, our action
will never be complete, it will always produce friction, conflict and
struggle. Seeing the various forms of meditation, of Zen, of Yoga
brought over from India, and the various contemplative groups of
monks and so on, in all that, there is the idea of control, acceptance

of a system, practising a repetition of words, which is called
mantra, and various forms of breathing, hatha yoga and so on. I
suppose you know all this. So first of all let us dispose of them
altogether by investigating. Not accepting what they say, but
investigating it, seeing the truth or the falseness of it. There is this
repetition of words, of sentences, mantras, a set of phrases given by
a guru, being initiated, paying money to learn a peculiar phrase to
be repeated by you secretly. Probably some of you have done that
and you know a great deal about it. That is called mantra yoga, and
is brought over from India. I don't know why you pay a single
penny to repeat certain words from somebody who says, "If you do
this you will achieve enlightenment, you will have a quiet mind."
When you repeat a series of words constantly, whether it is Ave
Maria or various Sanskrit words, obviously your mind becomes
rather dull and you have a peculiar sense of unity, of quietness, and
you think that will help to bring about clarity. You can see the
absurdity of it, because why should you accept what anybody says
about these matters - including myself? Why should you accept
any authority about the inward movement of life? We reject
authority outwardly; if you are at all intellectually aware and
observant politically you reject these things. But apparently we
accept the authority of somebody who says, "I know, I have
achieved, I have realised." The man who says he knows, he does
not know. The moment you say you know, you don't know. What
is it you know? Some experience which you have had, some kind
of vision, some kind of enlightenment? I dislike to use that word
"enlightenment". Once you have experienced that, you think you
have attained some extraordinary state; but that is past, you can

only know something which is over and therefore dead. When
these people come over and say they have realized, "Do this" or
"Do that" for so much money, this is obviously absurd. So we can
dispose of that.
We can also dispose of this whole idea of practising a system, a
method. When you practise a method in order to achieve
enlightenment, or bliss, or to have a quiet mind, or to achieve a
state of tranquility, whatever it is, it obviously makes the mind
mechanical, you repeat over and over again. This not only implies
suppression of your own movement and understanding, but also
conformity and the endless conflict involved in practising a
particular system. The mind likes to conform to a system because
then it gets crystallized and it is easy to live that way. So can we
dispose, now, of all systems of meditation? But you won't, because
our whole structure of habit is based on that demand to find a
method, so that we can just follow and live a monotonous, dull life
of routine; not to be disturbed, that is what we want, and so we
accept authority.
One has to find out for oneself, not through anybody. We have
had the authority of the priest for centuries upon centuries, the
authority of teachers, saviours and masters. If you really want to
find out what meditation is, you have to set aside all authority
completely and totally; not the authority of law, of the policeman law, legislation, you may understand later, when your own mind is
orderly and clear. Now what is meditation? Is it control of thought?
And if it is, who is the controller of thought? It is thought itself,
isn't it? Our whole culture, both in the East and in the West, is
based on control of thought and concentration, in which only one

thought can be pursued to the end. Why,should one control at all?
Control implies imitation, conformity, it implies the acceptance of
a pattern as the authority, according to which you are trying to live.
That pattern is set by the society, by the culture, by somebody who
you think has knowledge, enlightenment and so on. According to
that pattern one tries to live, suppressing all one's own feelings and
ideas, trying to conform. In that there is conflict, and conflict is
essentially a wastage of energy.
So concentration, which so many advocate in meditation, is
totally wrong. Are you accepting all this, or are you just listening
out of boredom? Because we must go into this question, whether
thought can function where necessary, without any form of control.
Can thought function when necessary as knowledge, in action, and
be completely still at other times? That is the real issue. The mind
which is cluttered up with so many activities of thought and is
therefore uncertain, is trying to find clarity in that confusion,
forcing itself to control, to conform to an idea; it therefore brings
about more and more confusion within itself. I want to find out
whether the mind can be quiet and only function when necessary.
Control, because it implies conflict, is a great waste of energy;
that is important to understand, because I feel meditation must be a
releasing of energy in which there is not the slightest friction. How
is a mind to do this? How is it to have such energy in which every
form of friction comes to an end? In enquiring into that, one must
understand oneself completely, there must be total self-knowing not according to any psychologist, philosopher or teacher, or the
pattern set by a particular culture - but to know oneself right
through, both at the conscious level as well as at the deeper levels,

is that possible? When there is complete understanding of oneself,
then there is the ending of conflict - and that is meditation.
Now, how am I to know myself? I can only know myself in
relationship; the observation of myself takes place only when there
is response and reaction in relationship; there is no such thing as
isolation. The mind is isolating itself all the time in all its activities,
building a wall round itself in order not to be hurt, not to have any
discomfort, unhappiness, or trouble; it is isolating itself all the time
in its self-centred activity. I want to know "myself" as I want to
know how to get from here to a particular town; that is, clearly,
watching everything that is involved in myself, my feelings, my
thoughts, my motives, conscious or unconscious. How is that
possible? The Greeks, the Hindus, the Buddhists have said: know
yourself. But apparently that is one of the most difficult things to
do. We are going to find out this morning how to look at ourselves;
because once you know yourself completely, that prevents all
friction, and therefore out of that comes this quality of energy
which is totally different. So to find out how to observe oneself,
one must understand what is meant by observing.
When we observe objective things like trees, clouds, the things
outside of us, there is not only the space between the observer and
the observed - the physical space - there is also the space of time.
When we look at a tree there is not only physical distance, but
there is also psychological distance. There is the distance between
you and the tree, the distance created by the image as knowledge:
that is an oak tree, or an elm. That image between you and the tree
separates you.
But when the quality of the mind of the observer is without the

image, which is imagination, then there is quite a different
relationship between the observer and the observed. Have you ever
looked at a tree without a single word of like or dislike, without a
single image? Have you noticed what then takes place? Then, for
the first time, you see the tree as it is and you see the beauty of it,
the colour, the depth, the vitality of it. A tree, or even another
person, is fairly easy to observe; but to observe oneself that way that is to observe without the observer - is much more difficult. So
one must find out who is the observer.
I want to watch myself, I want to know myself as deeply as
possible. What is the nature, the structure of that observer who is
watching? That observer is the past, isn't it? - the past knowledge
which he has collected and stored up; the past being the culture, the
conditioning. That is the observer who says, "This is right, this is
wrong, this must be, this must not be, this is good, this is bad." So
the observer is the past and with those eyes of the past we try to see
what we are. Then we say, "I don't like this, I am ugly", or "This I
will keep". All these discriminations and condemnations take
place. Can I look at myself without the eyes of the past? Can I
watch myself in action, which is in relationship, without any
movement of the past? Have you ever tried this? (I don't suppose
you have.)
When there is no observer then there is only the observed.
Please see this: I am envious, or I overeat, I am greedy. The normal
reaction is, "I must not overeat", "I must not be greedy", "I must
suppress", you know all that follows. In that there is the observer
trying to control his greed, or his envy. Now when there is an
awareness of greed without the observer, what takes place? Can I

observe that greed without giving it a name, as "greed"? The
moment I name it I have already fixed it as greed in my memory
which says: I must get over it, I must control. So is there an
observation of greed without the word, without justifying it,
without condemning it? Which means, can I observe this thing
called greed without any reaction whatsoever?
To so observe is a form of discipline, isn't it? Not imposing any
particular pattern, which means conformity, suppression and all the
rest of it, but to observe the whole series of actions without
condemning, justifying or naming just to observe. Then you will
see the mind is no longer wasting energy. It is then aware and
therefore it has energy to deal with that which it is observing.
Questioner: May I ask, Sir, whether the "me" observing the
"me" without naming it as the "me", is the same as observing the
past, also without naming it as the past?
Krishnamurti: Quite right, Sir, that's it. But once you understand
the whole mechanism it does not become difficult. Once you see
the truth of it, then that truth, that fact, acts. One can do that at the
conscious level. There are a great many unconscious responses,
motives, inclinations, tendencies, inhibitions and fears. How is one
to deal with all that? Must one go through analysing layer after
layer of hidden accumulations, exposing all that through dreams?
How is all that to be exposed totally so that knowing oneself
becomes complete?
Apparently it cannot be done by the conscious mind. I can't
investigate consciously the unconscious, the hidden. Can you?
Don't say "no" - sec the difficulty of it, because I don't know what
is hidden, and the hidden may intimate through dreams, but the

dreams need to be interpreted and that will take a lot of time, won't
it?
Questioner: I think it is possible under certain drugs to know
myself - there is no conflict.
Krishnamurti: Does any drug really expose the totality of the
content of consciousness, or does it bring about chemically a
certain state of mind, which is totally different from the
understanding of oneself? I have watched many people in India
taking drugs and I have also watched students at universities in
America, and others, who have been taking psychedelic drugs.
These drugs do affect the mind, the brain cells themselves - they
destroy the brain. If you have talked to those who have taken
drugs, you see they can't reason, they can't pursue a logical
sequence of thought. I am not asking you not to take drugs, it's up
to you; but you can see the effect of it on people. They have no
sense of responsibility, they think they can do anything they like and how many hospitals are full of people who are mentally
unbalanced through drugs. We are talking of something which is
non-chemical. If LSD, or any other drug, could bring about a state
of mind in which there is no conflict, and at the same time one
could maintain complete responsibility and a logical sequence of
thought and action, that would be marvellous.
We are asking: how is one to expose the whole hidden content
at one glance? Not through a series of dreams, not through
analysis, all that implies time and wastage of energy. This is an
important question because I want to understand myself - myself
being all my past, the experiences, the hurts, the anxieties, the
guilt, the various fears. How am I to comprehend all that

immediately? To understand all that immediately gives immense
energy. Now how do you do that? Is that an impossibility? We
have to ask the impossible question to find a way out of it. Unless
we ask the most impossible question we shall always be dealing
with what is possible, and what is possible is very little. So I am
asking the most impossible question, which is: to have this whole
content of consciousness exposed and understand it, see it totally,
without time - which means without analysis, exploration and
seeing layer after layer, which is an expenditure of time. How is
the mind to observe this whole content with one look?
If that question is put to you, as it is being put now, if you are
really listening to that question, what is your response? You
obviously say "I can't do it". You really don't know how to do it.
Are you waiting for somebody to tell you? If I say to myself, "I
don't know", am I waiting for somebody to inform me - am I
expecting an answer? When I am expecting an answer, then I
already know. Are you following this? When I say, "I don't know, I
really don't know" - I am not waiting for anybody to tell me, I am
not expecting anything because nobody can answer it. So I actually
don't know, What is the state of the mind that says "I really don't
know"?, I can't find it in any book, I can't ask anybody, I can't go to
any teacher or priest, I really don't know. When the mind says "I do
not know", what is the state of the mind? Please, don't answer me.
Do look at it, because we always say we know. I know my wife, I
know mathematics, I know this, 1 know that. We never say, "I
really don't know". I am asking; what is the state of the mind that
honestly says, "I don't know"? Don't verbalize immediately. When
I really mean I don't know, the mind has no answer. It is not

expecting anything from anybody. It is not waiting, it is not
expecting. So what happens? Is it not completely alone? It is not
isolated - isolation and aloneness are two different things. In that
quality of aloneness there is no influence, there is no resistance, it
has shed itself from all the past, it says, "I really don't know."
Therefore the mind has emptied itself of all its content. Have you
understood this?
I have asked the impossible question and I have said, "I don't
know." Therefore the mind empties itself of everything, of every
suggestion, every probability, every possibility; so the mind is
completely active and empty of all the past - which is time,
analysis, the authority of somebody. So it has exposed all the
content of itself by denying the content. Do you understand now?
As we said, meditation can only begin with the total understanding
of myself; that is part of the beginning of meditation. Without
understanding myself the mind can deceive itself, it can have
illusions according to its particular conditioning. When you know
your conditioning and are free of it, then there is no possibility of
any kind of illusion, and that is absolutely essential because we can
deceive ourselves so easily. So when I investigate into myself, I
see that consciousness is emptying itself of all its content through
knowing itself, not by denying anything, but by understanding the
whole content; that brings about great energy, which is necessary,
because that energy transforms completely all my activity. It is no
longer self-centred and therefore the cause of friction.
Meditation is a way of putting aside altogether everything that
man has conceived of himself and of the world. So he has a totally
different kind of mind. Meditation also means awareness, both of

the world and of the whole movement of oneself, to see exactly
what is, without any choice, without any distortion. Distortion
takes place the moment you bring in thought. Yet thought has to
function, but when there is an observation and thought interferes
with that observation as image, then there is distortion and illusion.
So to observe actually what is, in oneself and in the world, without
any distortion, a quiet, very still mind is necessary. One knows that
it is necessary to have a quiet mind, therefore there are various
systems to help you to control it, and all that means friction. If you
want to observe passionately, with intensity, the mind inevitably
becomes quiet. You don't have to force it - the moment you force
it, it is not quiet, it is dead. Can you see this truth, that to perceive
anything you must look? - and if you look with prejudice you
cannot see. If you see that, your mind is quiet.
Now what takes place in a quiet mind? We are enquiring not
only into that quality of energy in which there is no friction, but
also into how to bring about a radical change within oneself. One's
self is the world and the world is oneself - the world is not the fruit
separate from me: I am the world. It is not just an idea, but an
actual fact, that I am the world and the world is "me". So there is a
radical revolution, a change in me that will inevitably affect the
world, because I am part of the world.
In this enquiry into what meditation is, I see that any wastage of
energy is caused by friction in my relationship with another. Is it
possible to have a relationship with another in which there is no
friction whatsoever? That is possible only when I understand what
love is, and the understanding of what love is, is the denial of what
love is not. Jealousy, ambition, greed, self-centred activity,

obviously all that is not love. When in the understanding of myself
there is the total setting aside of all that which is not love, then it is.
The observation takes a second, the explanation and the description
takes a long time, but the act of observation is instantaneous.
In this observation I have found no system, no authority, no selfcentred activity, therefore there is no conformity, no comparison of
myself with another; to observe all this the mind must be
extraordinarily quiet. If you want to listen to what is being said just
now, you have to give attention, haven't you? You can't listen if
you are thinking about something else. If you are bored with this, I
can get up and go, but to force yourself to listen is absurd. If you
are really interested in it passionately, intensely, then you listen
completely, and to listen completely the mind must be quiet - this
is very simple. All this is meditation; not just sitting for five
minutes by yourself, cross-legged, breathing properly - that is not
meditation, that is self-hypnosis. I want to find out what is the
quality of the mind that is completely still and also what takes
place when it is still. I have observed, I have recorded, I have
understood and I have finished with that. But there is another
enquiry: what is the state of the mind, of the brain cells
themselves? The brain cells store up the memories that are useful,
that are necessary for their self-protection, memories of what might
lead to danger. Haven't you noticed this? I suppose you read a lot
of books? Personally I don't, therefore I can look into myself and
find out, watch myself, not according to somebody - but just watch.
I am asking myself what is the quality of such a mind, what has
happened to the brain? The brain records, that is its function. It
functions only through memory which protects it, otherwise it can't

function. The brain may find security in some neurosis; it has
found security in nationalism, in a belief in the family, in having
possessions, which are all various forms of neurosis. The brain
must be secure to function and it may choose to find that security
in something that is False, unreal, illusory, neurotic.
When I have examined myself thoroughly, all this disappears.
There is no neurosis, no belief, no nationality, no desire to hurt
anybody, nor to recall all the hurts. So the brain then is a recording
instrument, without thought using it as the "me" in operation. So
meditation implies not only the body being still but also the brain
being quiet. Have you ever watched your brain in operation? Why
you think certain things. Why you react to others, why you feel
desperately lonely, unloved, with nothing to rely on, no hope - you
know this tremendous sense of loneliness? Though you may be
married, have children and live in a group, there is this feeling of
complete emptiness. Seeing it, one tries to escape from it, but if
you remain with it, do not escape from it, just look at it completely
without condemning it or trying to overcome it, but observe it
actually as-it is, then you will see that what you considered to
be`loneliness ceases to be.
So the brain cells record, and thought as the "me" - my
ambitions, my greed, my purposes, my fulfilment - comes to an
end. Therefore the brain and the mind become extraordinarily quiet
and only function when necessary. Therefore your brain, your
mind, enters into quite a different dimension of which there is no
description; because the description is not the described. What we
have done this morning is description, explanation, but the word is
not the thing, when one realizes that then one is free of the word.

The quiet mind then enters into the immeasurable.
All our life is based on thought which is measurable. It
measures God, it measures its relationship with another through the
image. It tries to improve itself according to what it thinks it should
be. So unnecessarily we live in a world of measurement, and with
that world we want to enter into a world in which there is no
measurement at all. Meditation isthe seeing of what is and going
beyond it - seeing the measure and going beyond the measure.
What takes place when the brain, the mind and the body are really
quiet and harmonious - when the mind, the body and the heart are
completely one? Then one lives a totally different kind of life.
Questioner: What is intuition?
Krishnamurti: One has to be very careful of that word. Because
I like something unconsciously, I say I have an intuition about it.
Don't you know all the tricks one plays upon oneself through that
word? When you see things as they are, why do you want
intuition? Why do you want any form of hunch, of intimation? We
are talking of understanding oneself.
Questioner: When one is aware of one's sexual appetites, they
seem to disappear. Can that awareness, that attention, be
maintained all the time?
Krishnamurti: Watch the danger of this question. "When I am
aware of my sexual desires they seem to disappear." So awareness
is a trick which will help me to make things, which I don't like,
disappear. I don't like anger, therefore I am going to be aware of it
and perhaps it will disappear. But I do like my fulfilment, I want to
become a great man, and I won't be aware of that. I believe in God
and I worship the State, but I won't be aware of all the dangers

involved in that, although it separates, it destroys, it tortures
people. So I am going to be aware of the things that are most
unpleasant, but unaware of all those things which I want to keep.
Awareness is not a trick, it is not something that will help me to
dissolve the things we don't want. Awareness means to observe the
whole movement of like and dislike, of your suppressions. If you
are old-fashioned you don't talk about sex, you suppress it, but you
go on thinking about it - one has to be aware of all that.
Questioner: Sir, can we by understanding our minds, be aware
when we are asleep?
Krishnamurti: This is really a complex question. How am I to
be aware that I am asleep? Is there an awareness of what is going
on during sleep? Am I aware during the day of all the movements
that are going on within me, of all the reactions? If I am not aware
during the day, how am I going to be aware at at night when I
sleep? If you are aware during the day, watching, attentive to how
much you eat, what you say, what you think, of your motives, then
have you anything to be aware of during the night? Please find out.
If you are not aware, except of that which is going on as a
recording in the brain, what takes place? I have spent my day
actively, being aware, watching what I eat, what I think, what I
feel, how I talk to others. Jealousy, envy, greed, violence - I have
been completely aware of all that; which means I have brought
order there, not according to any plan. I have lived a disordered life
of not being aware; when I become aware of all this, there is order.
So when the body goes to sleep, what takes place? Generally the
brain tries to bring about order while you are asleep, because
during the conscious waking hours you have lived a disordered life

and the brain needs order. I don't know if you have watched it - the
brain cannot function properly, healthily if there is no order. So if
during the day there has been order, the brain is not trying to bring
about order when you sleep, through dreams, through intimations
and so on - it becomes quiet. It may record, but it is quiet and so
there is a possibility of renewal, a possibility of a mind no longer
fighting and struggling; therefore the mind becomes extraordinarily
young, fresh and innocent, in the sense that it won't hurt and will
not be hurt. Questioner: When a man has a message, the
relationship between that man and his followers is usually that of a
teacher. The teacher often has powers, and his message is a system.
Why don't you consider yourself a teacher and your message a
system?
Krishnamurti: I have made this fairly clear, haven't I? Don't
follow anybody and don't accept anybody as a teacher, except
when you yourself become your own teacher and disciple.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART X
A DISCUSSION WITH A SMALL GROUP AT
BROCKWOOD PARK 6TH JUNE 1970
'VIOLENCE AND THE"ME"'
Krishnamurti: When we go into any problem or issue we ought to
go into it completely and thoroughly, taking one thing at a time,
not vaguely talk about many things. So if we could take one real
human problem and talk it over together completely and seriously,
I think it would be worthwhile. So what shall we talk about?
Questioner (1): Education.
Questioner (2): Our lack of awareness.
Questioner (3): Love.
Questioner (4): Sir, sometimes, due to nervous fatigue, the mind
seems to lose its sensitivity. I was wondering what we could do to
cope with such a situation.
Krishnamurti: Could we take a problem like violence? It seems
to me it is spreading all over the world; could we see what the
implications are, and whether the human mind can really solve the
social and also the inward problems, without any kind of violence?
As one observes, in every part of the world there are revolts and
revolutions in order to change the social structure. Obviously the
structure has to be changed; is it possible to change it without
violence? - because violence begets violence. Through revolt one
party can assume the power of government, and having achieved
this, it will maintain itself in power through violence. It is fairly
obvious that this is what is happening throughout the world. So we
are asking whether there is a way of bringing about a change in the

world and in ourselves which does not breed violence. I should
have thought this would be a very serious problem for each one of
us. Would you like to discuss this? What do you say?
Questioner: Yes, let's discuss violence.
Krishnamurti: But let us go into it really deeply, not just
superficially, because in talking this over we should bear in mind
that it must also alter our ways of life. I do not know if you want to
go so deeply into this. My question is, whether the outside world,
the social structure, the injustice, the divisions, the appalling
brutality, wars, revolts and all the rest of it, can be changed, as well
as the inward struggle that is going on perpetually. Can all that be
changed without violence, without conflict, without opposition,
without forming one party as opposed to another party, not only
outwardly, but also without the inward division? - bearing in mind
that division is the source of conflict and of violence. How is one
to bring about this change, both outwardly and inwardly? I should
have thought that would be the most important issue that we have
to face. What do you say, Sirs? How do we discuss this?
Questioner: Shall we start with violence in a small child?
Krishnamurti: Shall we start with the children? With the
student, or with the educator? - which is ourselves. Let us talk it
over together, don't let me do all the talking.
Questioner (1): We should start with the educator.
Questioner (2): With ourselves. I see violence in ourselves
every day.
Krishnamurti: Where would you begin to resolve this problem?
In all parts of the world, even in Russia where some of the
intellectuals and writers are revolting against the tyranny, revolts

are going on; they want freedom, they want to stop wars. Where
would you start with this problem? Stopping wars in Vietnam, or in
the Middle East? Where does one begin to understand this
problem? At the periphery, or at the centre?
Questioner: In oneself, in one's life.
Krishnamurti: Where would you begin? With oneself, with
one's own home, or out there?
Questioner: Why not in both places? If one can bring about
some superficial change, that may resolve a certain superficial
problem. I see no reason why that shouldn't take place, as well as
individual enquiry.
Krishnamurti: Are we concerned with superficial changes, with
a superficial reformation? And therefore - which may be necessary
- put our energies, thought, affection and care in outward,
superficial reformation? Or do we begin at a wholly different
level? - not as the opposite of it.
Questioner: Are the two exclusive?
Krishnamurti: I did not say they were exclusive. I said they
were not opposite.
Questioner: I don't see it being a case of either one thing or the
other. One can see very clearly that one can achieve saving a
hundred lives by some superficial action. I see no contradiction.
Krishnamurti: I agree. There are many people who are pursuing
superficial activities, thousands of them! Do we exclude that and
entirely concern ourselves with our own house, or, in the very
concern for our house, is the other included too? It is not an
exclusion, or an opposition, or the avoidance of the one, and laying
emphasis on the other.

Questioner: Well, Sir, I won't persist, but it does seem that very
often people listen to you - myself included - who have thought
that individual enquiry was extremely important to resolve the
immediate problem to the exclusion of, say, political action, which
at its own level may resolve some particular issues, though not
fundamental ones. But I see no reason why they shouldn't go on in
parallel.
Krishnamurti: I quite agree, Sir. Do we deal with the
fundamental issues? Questioner: It is obviously the important
thing.
Krishnamurti: So, where shall we begin? Which is the
fundamental issue?
Questioner: The individual. The mass is the extension of the
individual.
Krishnamurti: It is very clear, isn't it? We want change, both
outwardly and inwardly, superficially and deeply. One does not
exclude the other: I must have food in order to think! Without
dividing, what is the fundamental issue? Where shall we tackle it?
Where shall we put our teeth into it?
Questioner: What is the cause of violence?
Krishnamurti: Shall we discuss that?
Questioner: Why do we want to change?
Krishnamurti: That is a good question, too. Why should we
change at all?
Another Questioner: Because we don't seem to be getting any
where in our present state.
Krishnamurti: And even if you got somewhere in your present
state wouldn't you want to change? Now, please, let us come back.

Questioner: In our present state we seem to have very little
possibility of moving; we are caught in our own individual ways,
by some event, over and over again. There is this lack of
movement in which we are always caught in life in some way or
another and therefore violence arises.
Krishnamurti: Shall we find out what are the causes of
violence? Each one will have a different opinion; even the experts
disagree on the causes of violence, volumes have been written
about it! Shall we go on explaining the causes, or see violence as it
is - as a fundamental issue in human relationship. And find out
whether it should perpetuate itself, or be changed, or modified.
What is the fundamental issue involved in violence? Questioner:
We are apparently issued with a sort of animal brain, that is the
main cause, I think we are naturally violent unless we can jump out
of it. Half the time politicians are behaving just like chickens in a
farmyard.
Krishnamurti: I know! (Laughter)
Questioner: Is it possible to look at the individual state of mind
to find out whether we are intrinsically violent within ourselves, in
the very mode of mental activity - whether this dualistic movement
is itself violent?
Krishnamurti: So, Sir, what would you consider to be violence?
Questioner (1): I think it is self-involvement, selfishness.
Questioner (2): Separation.
Questioner (3): Reaction to fear.
Krishnamurti: We have been educated to be violent. Our animal
nature and the activity of the human brain etc. are violent and
dividing; we all know this. Self-centred activities, to be aggressive,

opposing, resisting, asserting, all that makes for violence.
Questioner: There is also part of oneself that is repelled by
violence and another part which likes it, thrives on it.
Krishnamurti: Yes. There is part of oneself which resists
violence, is appalled by violence. Then, where are we?
Questioner: The desire to go into the problem of violence is
only a partial seeing. I mean, one does not totally want to resolve
the problem of violence.
Krishnamurti: Doesn't one?
Questioner: No.
Krishnamurti: Let's find out. Is it possible to resolve the
question of violence totally? Questioner (1): Isn't rebelling against
violence a kind of violence? I should think it could be very
destructive.
Questioner (2): If the mind, with its conditioning, is violent to
start with, then the outcome is bound to be violence.
Krishnamurti: So, what shall we do then, Sir?
Questioner: Would it be wise to just watch the violence without
splitting, or separating?
Krishnamurti: The gentleman raised the question: do we really
want to be free of all violence? Answer that question. Do we?
Which means to have no conflict, no dualistic activity within
oneself, no resistance, no opposition, no aggression, no ambition to
be somebody, not to assert one's opinion and oppose other
opinions. All that implies a form of violence. Not only the violence
of self-discipline, but also the violence that makes me twist my
particular desires in order to conform to a pattern, to make it moral,
or whatever it is; all these are forms of violence. Will is violence.

Do we want to be free of all this? And can a human being live,
being free from it?
Questioner: It seems that in the process we call our life, tension
is necessary. We have to distinguish, it seems, between tension and
violence. I am reminded of the story of the languishing herrings
who didn't really come to life until some dog-fish were put into the
tank. When does normal tension as a process of life cease, and
violence begin? Do we make a distinction here?
Krishnamurti: So you see tension is necessary?
Questioner: In everything there is polarity.
Krishnamurti: Please, Sir, let us find out. Does a human being us here - want to be free of all violence?
Questioner (1): This seems to me a very difficult question
because there are such a lot of contradictions in us. One says at this
moment that one does not want violence; the scene changes, and in
an hour's time one is violent, one is caught. One is broken up into
so many facets. Questioner (2): Someone may seriously attempt to
bring attention to violence within, but how does such a person react
when he is confronted with violence outside?
Krishnamurti: Wait, Sir, that is a later question. Do we here see
the importance of being totally free of all violence? Or would we
like to keep certain parts of it? Is it possible to be completely free
of all violence? - that means to be free of all irritation, all anger, of
any form of anxiety, and of resistance to anything.
Questioner: I think there is a difference between you positing
that question and an individual saying "I want to be free of all
violence". Because the one is a dispassionate looking at the
question, the other one is a movement - again a violent movement.

Krishnamurti: That is just it!
Questioner: It seems to me to be a real thing, or a reasonable
thing, to look at the question rather than try to resolve violence. To
me they are two different things.
Krishnamurti: Then, what is the question, sir?
Questioner: Is it possible to be completely free of violence?
Krishnamurti: That is all.
Questioner: It is quite different from seeking to be free of
violence.
Krishnamurti: Quite! Then what do I do? - is it possible?
Questioner (1): If one sees the pattern of one's daily life, one
sees that it seems that without some form of violence - or maybe
what this gentleman calls tension - one could perhaps never carry
through one distinct job in the face of the pressures and difficulties
that often surround one in society. We talk about freedom from
violence when we are angry, or afraid, as if we were trapped, but I
feel that perhaps there is always some violence in our lives. It is
difficult to conceive living, doing some job and so on, without
some kind of drive which I feel is violence.
Questioner (2): Isn't there a difference between tension and
violence? It seems that violence being resistance and aggression, is
deadening; it tries to stop something. Whilst tension is moving
with what you are doing. It seems to me we have to have an
understanding of the difference between violence and tension.
Krishnamurti: Sir, can we pursue that question: is it possible for
a human being to be completely free of violence? We have
understood what we mean by violence, more or less.
Questioner (1): I don't think we have. If there is no difference

between violence and energy, then I wouldn't want to be free of
violence.
Questioner (2): If we could see our violence the whole time,
there would be no violence.
Krishnamurti: No, Sir. before we come to that point, as a human
being, have I said to myself: is it possible to live without violence?
Questioner: One obviously does not know.
Krishnamurti: So let us enquire, Sir, let us find out.
Another Questioner: Wouldn't the only way to find out be to do
it?
Krishnamurti: Not only do it, but enquire, go into it, watch it, be
aware of this whole movement of resistance. Knowing the danger
of violence, seeing the outward effects of it, the divisions, the
horrors, and so on, I ask myself: is it possible for me to be free of
all violence? I really don't know. So I am going to enquire, I want
to find out, not verbally, but passionately! Human beings have
lived with violence for thousands of years and I want to find out
whether it is possible to live without violence. Now where shall I
begin?
Questioner: Would you first try to understand what violence is?
Krishnamurti: I know very well what it is: anger, jealousy,
brutality, revolt, resistance, ambition, all the rest of it. We don't
have to define endlessly what violence is.
Questioner: I don't really see ambition as violence.
Krishnamurti: No? Another Questioner: Is it possible to see how
it arises in oneself, when it comes up, when it reaches the surface?
Krishnamurti: Sir, must I wait till anger comes up, and then be
aware of that anger and say, "I am violent"? Is that what you

propose, Sir?
Questioner: The movement leading up to it is very rarely caught
by us.
Another Questioner: Should we understand thought? - the
sudden thoughts?
Krishnamurti: Sir, it is such a vast problem, don't let us take
little bits of it, let us observe it at the very core. What makes the
mind violent in me, in this human body, in this person? What is the
source of this violence? Watch it in yourself.
Another Questioner: Is it my desire to achieve something, to
gain something, to be something? I want to look and see how much
of the violence that I knew I had, I could give up - and still survive
within acceptable limits. That would be my first step.
Krishnamurti: Within acceptable limits - and that may also be
violent.
Questioner: Yes, I would expect I should still have a degree of
violence.
Krishnamurti: I am asking myself whether it is possible to live
without violence and I say: what is the root of this? If I could
understand that, perhaps I would know how to live without
violence. What is the root of it?
Questioner: The feeling of revolution, of separation.
Krishnamurti: You say the root of this violence is separation,
division, the "me". Can the mind live without the "me"? Please go
on, let us enquire.
Questioner: Is it true that as long as there is an objective, or
desire of any kind, there is the seed of violence?
Krishnamurti: Of Course! That is the whole point. We must go

step by step into this. Please, Sirs, go on! Questioner: Does not this
pose the question: is it possible to live without any objective?
Krishnamurti: Yes. Is it possible to live without any objective,
without any principle, without any aim, without any purpose?
Questioner: The purpose is life.
Krishnamurti: The opposite of that is to drift. Therefore we
must be careful that we don't think in terms of the opposite. If I
have no objective, then I am just drifting. So I must be very careful
when I say, "To have an objective is a form of violence; to have no
objective may be to drift.
Questioner: But this is irrelevant, Sir, because whether one
drifts or not isn't the question. The question is: is it possible to live
without violence?
Krishnamurti: I'm only warning, Sir, not to go into the opposite.
Now, is it possible to live without direction? Direction means
resistance, means no distraction, no distortion, it means a
continuous drive towards a goal. Why do I want a purpose, an end?
And that end, the goal, the purpose, the principle, the ideal - is it
true? Or is it a thing which the mind has invented because it is
conditioned, because it is afraid, because it is seeking security,
both outwardly and inwardly and therefore invents something and
pursues that, hoping to have security?
Another Questioner: At times one has perhaps had intimations
of this other thing and those intimations seem to give a drive.
Krishnamurti: Yes, one may have an intimation of it, but that
isn't good enough for me. I'm going to find out whether it is
possible to live without violence, and that is a passionate thing. It is
not just an ideological fancy, I really want to find out.

Questioner: The trouble is, I don't really feel this question.
Krishnamurti: You don't feel it?
Questioner: Not enough to reach out, to go towards it.
Krishnamurti: Why don't you? Why not? The whole issue of
existence is this!
Questioner: I think this is a problem for most of us.
Krishnamurti: Good God! They are burning, they are
destroying, and you say, "I am sorry, it doesn't really interest me!"
Questioner (1): If the question of violence interests you, I think
you are already assisting the burning and enjoying it. I think if you
didn't have violence in yourself, you wouldn't be really interested.
Questioner (2): Sir, what is the meaning of the word "violence"?
Would you include things such as enthusiasm for something, drive,
pep? Would you call these things violence?
Krishnamurti: Not what would I call it, Sir - what do you call it?
Questioner: I don't know...
Krishnamurti: I am not an oracle, let us find out. Let us stick to
this question. Is it possible for me to live completely without
violence?
Questioner: We are caught in a terrible trap.
Krishnamurti: We are caught in it; do we remain in it?
Questioner: No, but we have a body and a self to preserve. It is
very difficult.
Krishnamurti: What shall I do? - please, answer my question!
To me this is of tremendous importance. The world is burning.
Don't say, "My body is weak, this is difficult, it is not possible, I
must be a vegetarian, I must not kill." I am asking: is it possible?
And to find that out, I must find out what the source of this

violence is.
Questioner: I think it is being divided. If I am divided I must be
violent. I feel I will be destroyed, therefore I am afraid.
Krishnamurti: Therefore we accept violence?
Questioner: No, but we want to destroy the thing we are afraid
of.
Krishnamurti: Sir, would you put it this way: if you could find
the source, the root of this violence, and if that root could wither
away, you might live a totally different kind of life. So, wouldn't it
be worthwhile to find out what is the root of it, and whether it can
wither away?
Questioner: Probably it is connected with fear.
Krishnamurti: I am not interested in fear. I want to end violence
because I see violence begets violence. This violence is an endless
process. You know what is happening in the world. So I ask
myself: is it possible to end violence? Before I can answer that
question, I must find out what is the root of all these innumerable
branches.
Another Questioner: But we can't do it by thinking about it.
Krishnamurti: We are going to find out. We are going to think
about it and see the futility of thought, and then go outwards. But
we must exercise our intelligence, our thought.
Questioner: So long as I want to do anything, there is violence
to a greater or lesser degree.
Krishnamurti: I understand this. I just said, look: is it possible to
live without violence? And to find that out, there must be an
enquiry into the root of it.
Questioner: What I am trying to say is, that the whole structure

of life as we know it, is wanting to do this, wanting to do that everything involves violence.
Krishnamurti: Of course, Sir, that's agreed.
Questioner: Paradoxically, might one consider selfpreservation?
Krishnamurti: You see, you are all not bringing up the main,
fundamental issue. Questioner: Sir,you keep talking about the root,
but living in a town, the way life is at the moment, violence in
human society is just like the air one has to breathe, it is like a fog
that envelops everything. The question about the root of it doesn't
spring to my mind. One sees violence in an animal-like way, one
knows of people being frightened and behaving in a certain way,
but one is only aware of a series of reactions.
Krishnamurti: I understand all that, Sir. I am asking you: what is
the root of this?
Questioner: The self.
Krishnamurti: The self! All right. If the "me" is the root of all
this, what shall I do? Having discovered the "me" wanting this, not
wanting that, the "me" wanting a purpose and running after it, the
"me" that resists, that has a battle with itself, if that is the root of
violence - which for me is the root - then what shall I do with it?
Questioner: You cannot do anything.
Krishnamurti: Wait, Sir! Do I accept it? Do I live in this battle,
with this violence?
Questioner: I feel, Sir, that if you say, "I am violent", you
haven't got to the root of the problem.
Krishnamurti: No, you haven't. Quite right.
Questioner: Because one can go on saying "I am violent"

endlessly.
Krishnamurti: Agreed. I see the "me" with all its branches is the
cause of violence; it is the "me" that separates: you and me, we and
they; the Blacks and the Whites, the Arabs and the Israelis, and so
on.
Questioner: Rationally, you could say: eliminate the "me".
Krishnamurti: How is the mind to eliminate its own structure,
which is based on the "me"? Sir, do look at the issue. The "me" is
the root of all this; the "me" is identified with a particular nation,
with a particular community, with a particular ideology or religious
fancy. The "me" identifies itself with a certain prejudice, the "me"
says "I must fulfil; and when it feels frustrated, there is anger and
bitterness. It is the "me" that says, "I must reach my goal, I must be
successful", that wants and doesn't want, that says "I must live
peacefully", and it is the "me" that gets violent.
Questioner: Though it seems to be an entity, to me it is more of
an action, or an activity. Is this word not misleading us?
Krishnamurti: No, it isn't. It does not mean it is something solid,
like the trunk of a tree. It is a movement, it is a living thing. One
day it feels marvellous, the next day it is in great depression. One
day it is passionate, lustful, the next day it is worn out and says,
"Let me have some peace." It is a constantly moving, active thing.
How is this movement to transform itself into another movement,
without becoming violent? First, let us get the question right. We
said: this is a movement, it is a living thing, it is not static, it is not
something dead, it is adding to itself all the time, and taking away
from itself all the time. This is the "me". And when the "me" says,
"I must get rid of the `me'," wanting to have another "me", it is still

violent; the "me" that says: "I am a pacifist, I live peacefully", the
me that seeks truth, the me that says "I must live beautifully, nonviolently", is still the "me" which is the cause of violence.
What will the mind do with this living thing? And the mind
itself is the "me". Do you understand the question? Any movement
on the part of the "me" to get rid of itself, to say "I must wither
away", "I must destroy myself", "I must gradually get rid of
myself", is still that same movement of the "me", is still the "me"
which is the root of violence. Do we realize that? Do we really see
that? Not theoretically, but actually realize the truth of it, that any
movement of the "me" in any direction, is the action of violence.
Do I actually, sensuously, intelligently, see the truth of it, know the
feel of it? If the mind does not, it can go on playing with words for
ever.
Questioner: Does the mind consist only of the "me"? Are they
identical?
Krishnamurti: When the mind is not occupied with the "me", it
is not the "me". But most of us are occupied with the "me",
consciously or unconsciously.
Questioner: We seem to be able to give up all kinds of thoughts
and as the "me" is put together by thought, why can't we discard it?
Krishnamurti: No, Sir, it is impossible to discard anything,
except perhaps smoking cigarettes. Please, let us stick to this one
thing: do I actually see that in the action of the "me", negative or
positive, there is a form of violence. It is violence. If I don't see it,
why not? What is wrong with my eyesight, with my feeling? Is it
that I am afraid what will happen if I see it? Or am I bored with the
whole thing? Please, come on, Sirs!

Questioner: Sometimes one is carried away, and therefore...
Krishnamurti: No, Sir, no. It is not a question of being carried
away. Not to be violent - I want to find this out!
Another Questioner: We can't rake up the energy to keep the
mind on the subject.
Krishnamurti: No, Sir. If you say you haven't the energy, the
collecting of that energy is again a form of the "me", which says "I
must have more energy in order to tackle this". Any movement of
the "me", which is thought, conscious or unconscious, is still the
"me". Do I really see the truth of this?
Questioner: Is there something behind the "me" which in
essence is not of thought?
Krishnamurti: Do listen to that question; don't say, "We don't
know or we do." Is there anything behind the "me" which is not of
the me?
Questioner: If there is, and we think about it, it is yet again part
of the "me".
Krishnamurti: Who is putting this question? Surely it is the
"me"! Questioner: Why not? Thought is a tool, why not use it?
Krishnamurti: No, you can t say "Why not" - it is still the
movement of the "me".
Questioner: You have asked: do we really see that any
movement of the "me" is violence? I think the only reason that we
can't see it, is because we reject violence.
Krishnamurti: Oh, no. Either you see it or you don't see it. It
isn't a question of something that prevents you from seeing. I don't
see my affection for my dog, or for my wife, or husband, for the
beauty of it is part of me; because I think that is a most marvellous

state.
Questioner: Sir, by definition you have virtually said that life is
violence, movement, change.
Krishnamurti: As we live now, life, living, is a form of violence.
Questioner: Is life possible without change, without movement?
Krishnamurti: That's what we are asking. The life we lead is a
life of violence, which is caused by the "me", and we are saying:
do we see that any movement of the "me" in any direction,
conscious, or unconscious, is a form of violence? If I don't see it,
why don't I see it? What is wrong?
Questioner: It seems to me it is the "me" that is seeing it.
Krishnamurti: Wait. Is it the "me" that sees it?
Questioner: Is it intelligence?
Krishnamurti: I don't know, you find out! What is it that sees
that the "me" is the root of all mischief? Sir, please watch it. Who
sees it?
Questioner: I don't see it. I'm afraid to give up everything I've
ever known.
Krishnamurti: So you don't want to see that the "me" is
responsible for this hideous mess. Because one says: I don't care if
the world goes bust, but I want to have my little corner. Therefore I
don't see the "me", the root of all mischief.
Questioner: Would you soy there is another "me", other than the
thinking process with an object in view? When I think towards
something, towards an object, to me this is the "me", and there is
no other "me" except that process.
Krishnamurti: Obviously.
Questioner: But you said it isn't the thing that sees the

significance of the question.
Krishnamurti: No. We said, this "me" is a living thing, a
movement. All the time it is adding to itself and taking away from
itself. And this "me", this movement, is the root of all violence.
Not only this "me" as something static which invents the soul,
which invents God, Heaven and punishment - it is the whole of
that.
We are asking: does the mind realize that the "me" is the cause
of this mischief? The mind - use the word intelligence if you like which sees the whole map of violence, all the intricacies, sees it by
observing, this mind says: that is the root of all evil. So the mind
now asks: is it possible to live without the "me"?
Questioner: The process of seeing is different from the process
of moving in a certain direction towards something.
Krishnamurti: Right. The process of seeing is entirely different.
It is not a process. I won't use that word. The seeing is seeing now;
it is not a process of seeing. Seeing is acting. Now, does the mind
see this whole map of violence and the root of it? And what is it
that sees? If the "me" sees it, then it is afraid to live differently,
then the "me" says "I must protect myself, I must resist this, I am
afraid". Therefore the "me" refuses to see the map. But the seeing
is not the "me".
Questioner: Seeing has no purpose, has it? Krishnamurti: There
is no purpose in seeing the map; it just sees.
Questioner: But, immediately I say that I see it...
Krishnamurti: Wait! Do we realize that the mind which is
observing this entire map is entirely different from the "me" which
sees it and is afraid to break from it? There are two different

observations: the "me" seeing, and "seeing". The "me" seeing must
inevitably be afraid, and must therefore resist and say, "How shall I
live?" What shall I do? Must I give this up? Must I hold on?" and
so on. We said: any movement of the "me" is violence. But there is
a mere seeing of the map, which is entirely different. Is this clear?
Now, which is it that you are doing?
Questioner: The "me" is seeing.
Krishnamurti: You say the "me" is seeing - therefore it is afraid.
Another Questioner: Of course, it is afraid.
Krishnamurti: What will you do, knowing any movement of the
"me" is still furthering that fear?
Questioner: I don't know.
Krishnamurti: Ah! What do you mean by, "You don't know"?
Questioner: To me, the "me" is all I know.
Krishnamurti: No, Sir, we have made it very clear. Do listen to
this. There are two actions of seeing. Seeing the map nondirectionally, non-purposively, just seeing, and the "me" seeing the "me" with its purpose, with its drive, with its directive, with its
resistances. It sees and is afraid to do this, or that.
Questioner: Are you using the word "see" now in the way in
which you normally speak of being aware? Krishnamurti: I am just
using the word "seeing" for a change, that's all.
Questioner: Sir,you tell me there is a state in which you can see
without the "me", but I have never experienced this.
Krishnamurti: Do it now, Sir! I am showing it to you! There is
the "me" that looks at this whole map of violence and therefore is
afraid and resists. And there is another seeing which is not of the
"me", which just observes, non-objectively, non-purposively, and

says, "I just see it".
But this is simple, isn't it? I see you have got a green shirt; I
don't say, "I like it" or "I dislike it", I just see it. But the moment I
say, "I like it", it is already the "me" saying "I like it; and therefore
all the rest of it follows. This is sufficiently clear - verbally at least.
Questioner: Could we go into the question of why this looking
without the "me" is so very difficult and happens so rarely.
Krishnamurti: I don't think it is difficult. Don't say it is difficult;
then you are stuck, then you have blocked yourself.
Questioner: Could one summarize this by saying that in one
case there is a seeing without purpose, and in the other case
purpose is involved?
Krishnamurti: Yes, that's all. Can I look without direction?
When I look with a direction, it is the "me". What is the difficulty
in this, may I ask?
Another Questioner: Usually we have the illusion that looking,
with a direction is looking.
Krishnamurti: Looking with a direction is not looking
obviously.
Questioner: There is a difference between looking and seeing. If
one is looking, one is involved.
Krishnamurti: Don't let's complicate it. We said: does the mind
see the whole map, without any direction?
Questioner: The map is selected from both directions.
Krishnamurti: No, no. Just look. This whole structure of the "me"
is violence; the structure being the way I live, the way I think, the
way I feel, my whole reaction to everything is a form of violence
which is the "me". That is all in the category of time. The "seeing"

has no time - you are seeing it. The moment I see with time there is
fear.
Questioner: There is seeing, and the thing seen. When once you
have seen something is it the old mind that has seen?
Krishnamurti: Yes. Now do find out, Sir, how do you see? Do
you see non-purposively, or purposively? Do you see in terms of
time? That is, do you say, "It is too difficult, it is too complex,
what am I to do?" Or do you see without time?
If you say, "I don't see it without time," the next question is,
"Why? What is the difficulty?" Is it physical blindness, or is it
psychological disinclination to look at anything as it is? Is it
because we have never looked at anything directly, are always
trying to avoid, to escape? Therefore, if we are escaping, let us see
that - not try to find out how to resist escape.

THE AWAKENING OF INTELLIGENCE PART
XI CONVERSATION WITH PROFESSOR DAVID
BOHM BROCKWOOD PARK 7TH OCTOBER
1972 'ON INTELLIGENCE'

Professor Bohm: About intelligence, I always like to look up the
origin of a word as well as its meaning. It is very interesting; it
comes from inter and legere which means "To read between',. So it
seems to me that you could say that thought is like the information
in a book and that intelligence has to read it, the meaning of it. I
think this gives a rather good notion of intelligence.
Krishnamurti: To read between the lines.
Bohm: Yes, to see what it means. There is also another relevant
meaning given in the dictionary which is: mental alertness.
Krishnamurti: Yes, mental alertness.
Bohm: Well, this is very different from what people have in
mind when they measure intelligence. Now, considering many of
the things you have said, you would say intelligence is not thought.
You say thought takes place in the old brain, it is a physical
process, electrochemical; it has been amply proved by science that
all thought is essentially a physical, chemical process. Then we
could say perhaps that intelligence is not of the same order, it is not
of the order of time at all.
Krishnamurti: Intelligence.
Bohm: Yes, intelligence reads "between the lines" of thought,
sees the meaning of it. There is one more point before we start on
this question: if you say thought is physical, then the mind or
intelligence or whatever you want to call it, seems different, it is of

a different order. Would you say there is a real difference between
the physical and intelligence?
Krishnamurti: Yes. Are we saying that thought is matter? Let us
put it differently.
Bohm: Matter? I would rather call it a material process.
Krishnamurti: All right; thought is a material process, and what
is the relationship between that and intelligence? Is intelligence the
product of thought?
Bohm: I think that we can take for granted that it is not.
Krishnamurti: Why do we take it for granted?
Bohm: Simply because thought is mechanical.
Krishnamurti: Thought is mechanical, that is right.
Bohm: Intelligence is not.
Krishnamurti: So thought is measurable; intelligence is not. And
how does it happen that this intelligence comes into existence? If
thought has no relationship with intelligence, then is the cessation
of thought the awakening of intelligence? Or is it that intelligence,
being independent of thought, not of time, therefore exists always?
Bohm: That raises many difficult questions.
Krishnamurti: I know.
Bohm: I would like to put this in a framework of thinking that
one could connect with any scientific views that may exist.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: Either to show that it fits or doesn't fit. So you say
intelligence may be there always.
Krishnamurti: I am asking - is it there always?
Bohm: It may or may not be. Or it is possible that something
interferes with intelligence?

Krishnamurti: You see the Hindus have the theory that
intelligence, or Brahman, exists always and is covered over by
illusion, by matter, by stupidity, by all kinds of mischievous things
created by thought. I don't know if you would go as far as that.
Bohm: Well, yes; we don't actually see the eternal existence of
intelligence.
Krishnamurti: They say peel all this off, that thing is there. So
their assumption is that it existed always.
Bohm: There is a difficulty in that, in the word "always".
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: Because "always" implies time.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: And that is just the trouble. Time is thought - I would
like to put it that thought is of the order of time - or perhaps it is
the other way round - that time is of the order of thought. In other
words thought has invented time, and in fact thought is time. The
way I see it is, that thought may sweep over the whole of time in
one moment; but then thought is always changing without noticing
that it is changing physically - for physical reasons, that is.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: Not rational reasons.
Krishnamurti: No.
Bohm: The reasons do not have to do with something total, but
they have to do with some physical movement in the brain;
therefore...
Krishnamurti: ...they depend on environment and all kinds of
things.
Bohm: So as thought changes with time its meaning is no longer

consistent, it becomes contradictory, it changes in an arbitrary way.
Krishnamurti: Yes, I'll follow that.
Bohm: Then you begin to think, everything is changing,
everything changes, and one realizes "I am in time". When time is
extended it becomes vast, the past before I was, farther and further
back and also forward in the future, so you begin to say time is the
essence of all, time conquers everything. First the child may think,
"I am eternal; then he begins to understand that he is in time. The
general view that we get to is, that time is the essence of existence.
This I think is not only the common sense view but also the
scientific view. It is very hard to give up such a view because it is
an intense conditioning. It is stronger even than the conditioning of
the observer and the observed.
Krishnamurti: Yes, quite. Are we saying that thought is of time,
thought is measurable, thought can change, modify, expand? And
intelligence is of a different quality altogether?
Bohm: Yes, different order, different quality. And I get an
interesting impression of this thought with regard to time. If we
think of the past and the future, we think of the past as becoming
the future; but you can see that that can't be, that it is just thought.
Yet one gets the impression that past and future are present
together and there is movement in another way; that the whole
pattern is moving.
Krishnamurti: The whole pattern is moving.
Bohm: But I can't picture how it moves. In some sense it is
moving in a perpendicular direction to the direction between past
and future. That whole movement - then I begin to think that
movement is in another time.

Krishnamurti: Quite, quite.
Bohm: But that gets you back into the paradox.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that is it. Is intelligence out of time and
therefore not related to thought, which is a movement of time?
Bohm: But thought must be related to it.
Krishnamurti: Is it? I am asking. I think it is unrelated.
Bohm: Unrelated? But there seems to be some relation in the
sense that you distinguish between intelligent thought and
unintelligent thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes, but that requires intelligence: to recognise
unintelligent thought.
Bohm: But when intelligence reads thought, what is the
relationship?
Krishnamurti: Let us go slowly...
Bohm: And does thought respond to intelligence? Doesn't
thought change?
Krishnamurti: Let us be simple. Thought is time. Thought is
movement in time. Thought is measurable and thought functions in
the field of time, all moving, changing, transforming. Is
intelligence within the field of time? Bohm: Well, we've seen that
in one sense it can't be. But the thing is not clear. First of all,
thought is mechanical.
Krishnamurti: Thought is mechanical, that is clear.
Bohm: Secondly, in some sense there is a movement which is of
a different direction.
Krishnamurti: Thought is mechanical; being mechanical it can
move in different directions and all the rest of it. Is intelligence
mechanical? Let's put it that way.

Bohm: I would like to ask the question, what does
mechanicalness mean?
Krishnamurti: All right: repetitive, measurable, comparative.
Bohm: I would say also dependent.
Krishnamurti: Dependent, yes.
Bohm: Intelligence - let us get it clear - intelligence cannot be
dependent on conditions for its truth. Nevertheless, it seems that in
some sense intelligence doesn't operate if the brain is not healthy.
Krishnamurti: Obviously.
Bohm: In that sense intelligence seems to depend on the brain.
Krishnamurti: Or is it the quietness of the brain?
Bohm: All right, it depends on the quietness of the brain.
Krishnamurti: Not on the activity of the brain.
Bohm: There is still some relation between intelligence and the
brain. We once discussed this question many years ago, when I
raised the idea that in physics you could use a measuring
instrument in two ways, the positive and the negative. For
example, you can measure an electric current by the swing of the
needle in the instrument, or you can use the same instrument in
what is called the Wheatstone bridge, where the reading you look
for is a null reading; a null reading indicates harmony, balance of
the two sides of the whole system as it were. So if you are using
the instrument negatively, then the non-movement of the
instrument is the sign that it is working right. Could we say the
brain may have used thought positively to make an image of the
world...
Krishnamurti: ...which is the function of thought - one of the
functions.

Bohm: The other function of thought is negative, which is by its
movement to indicate non-harmony.
Krishnamurti: Yes, non-harmony. Let us proceed from there. Is
intelligence dependent on the brain - have we come to that point?
Or when we use the word "dependent" what do we mean by that?
Bohm: It has several possible meanings. There may be simple
mechanical dependence. But there is another kind: that one can't
exist without the other. If I say, "I depend on food to exist", it
doesn't mean that everything I think is determined by what I eat.
Krishnamurti: Yes, quite.
Bohm: So I propose that intelligence depends for its existence
on this brain, which can indicate non-harmony, but the brain does
not have anything to do with the content of intelligence.
Krishnamurti: So if the brain is not harmonious, can intelligence
function?
Bohm: That is the question.
Krishnamurti: That is what we are saving. It cannot function if
the brain is hurt.
Bohm: If the intelligence doesn't function, is there intelligence?
Therefore it seems that intelligence requires the brain in order to
exist.
Krishnamurti: But the brain is only an instrument. Bohm:
Which indicates this harmony or disharmony.
Krishnamurti: But it is not the creator of the other.
Bohm: No.
Krishnamurti: Let us go into this slowly.
Bohm: The brain doesn't create intelligence but it is an
instrument which helps intelligence to function. That is it.

Krishnamurti: That's it. Now if the brain is functioning within
the field of time, up and down, negatively, positively, can
intelligence operate in that movement of time? Or must that
instrument be quiet for the intelligence to operate?
Bohm: Yes. I would put it possibly slightly differently. The
quietness of the instrument is the operation of intelligence.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that is right. The two are not separate.
Bohm: They are one and the same. The non-quietness of the
instrument is the failure of the intelligence.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: But I think it would be useful to go back into questions
which tend to be raised in the whole of scientific and philosophical
thinking. We would ask the question: is there some sense in which
intelligence exists independently of matter? You see that some
people have thought that mind and matter have some separate kind
of existence. This is one question that comes up. It may not be
relevant, but I think the question should be considered in order to
help to make the mind quiet. The consideration of questions that
cannot be clearly answered is one of the things that disturbs the
mind.
Krishnamurti: But you see, Sir, when you say, "Help to make
the mind quiet", will thought help the awakening of intelligence? It
means that, doesn't it? Thought and matter and the exercise of
thought and the movement of thought, or thought saying to itself,
"I will be quiet in order to help the awakening of intelligence". Any
movement of thought is time, any move- ment, because it is
measurable, it is functioning positively or negatively,
harmoniously, or disharmoniously, in this field. And realizing that

thought may say unconsciously, or unknowingly, that "I would be
quiet in order to have this or that", then that is still within the field
of time.
Bohm: Yes. It is still projecting.
Krishnamurti: It is projecting it to capture it. So how does this
intelligence take place - not how - when does it awaken?
Bohm: Once again the question is in time.
Krishnamurti: That is why I don't want to use the words
"when", "how".
Bohm: You might perhaps say the condition for it to awaken is
the non-operation of thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: But that is the same as the awakening, it is not merely
the condition. You can't even ask if there are conditions for
intelligence to awaken. Even to talk about a condition is a form of
thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Let us agree, any movement of thought in
any direction, vertical, horizontal, in action or non-action, is still in
time - any movement of thought.
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Then what is the relationship of that movement to
this intelligence which is not a movement, which is not of time,
which is not the product of thought? Where can the two meet?
Bohm: They don't meet. But there is still a relation.
Krishnamurti: That is what we are trying to find out. Is there
any relationship at all, first? One thinks there is a relationship, one
hopes there is a relationship, one projects a relationship. Is there a
relationship at all? Bohm: That depends what you mean by

relationship?
Krishnamurti: Relationship: being in contact with, recognition,
a feeling of being in touch with.
Bohm: Well, the word relationship might mean something else.
Krishnamurti:What other meaning has it?
Bohm: For example there is a parallel, isn't there? The harmony
of the two. That is, two things may be related without contact, but
by simply being in harmony.
Krishnamurti: Does harmony mean a movement of both in the
same direction?
Bohm: It might also mean in some way keeping in the same
order.
Krishnamurti: In the same order: same direction, same depth,
same intensity - all that is harmony. But can thought ever be
harmonious? - thought as movement, not static thought.
Bohm: I understand. There is that thought which you abstract as
static, in geometry let us say, that may have some harmony; but
thought as it actually moves is always contradictory.
Krishnamurti: Therefore it has no harmony in itself. But
intelligence has harmony in itself.
Bohm: I think I see the source of the confusion. We have the
static products of thought that seem to have a certain relative
harmony. But that harmony is really the result of intelligence, at
least it seems so to me. In mathematics we may get a certain
relative harmony of the product of thought, even though the actual
movement of thought of a mathematician is not necessarily in
harmony, generally won't be in harmony. Now that harmony which
appears in mathematics is the result of intelligence, isn't it?

Krishnamurti: Proceed, Sir. Bohm: It is not perfect harmony
because every form of mathematics has been proved to have some
limit; that is why I call it only relative.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Now, in the movement of thought is there
harmony? If there is, then it has relationship with intelligence. If
there is no harmony but contradictions and all the rest of it, then
thought has no relationship with the other.
Bohm: Then would you say that we could do entirely without
thought?
Krishnamurti: I would put it round the other way. Intelligence
uses thought.
Bohm: All right. But how can it use something which is
disharmonious?
Krishnamurti: Expression, communication, using thought which
is contradictory, which is not harmonious, to create things in the
world.
Bohm: But still, there must be harmony in some other sense, in
what is done with thought, in what we have just described.
Krishnamurti: Let us go slowly in this. Can we first put into
words, negatively or positively, what is intelligence, what is not
intelligence? Or is that impossible because words are thought,
time, measure and so on?
Bohm: We can't put it in words. We are trying to point. Can we
say that thought can function as the pointer to intelligence, and
then its contradiction doesn't matter.
Krishnamurti: That is right. That is right.
Bohm: Because we are not using it for its content, or its
meaning, but rather as a pointer which points beyond the domain of

time.
Krishnamurti: So thought is a pointer. The content is
intelligence. Bohm: The content which it points to.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Can we put this thing entirely differently?
May we say, thought is barren?
Bohm: Yes. When it moves by itself, yes.
Krishnamurti: Which is mechanical and all the rest of it.
Thought is a pointer, but without intelligence the pointer has no
value.
Bohm: Could we say that intelligence reads the pointer? If the
pointer has nobody to see it then the pointer doesn't point.
Krishnamurti: Quite. So intelligence is necessary. Without it
thought has no meaning at all.
Bohm: But could we now say: that if thought is not intelligent it
points in a very confused way?
Krishnamurti: Yes, in an irrelevant way.
Bohm: Irrelevant, meaningless and so on. Then with
intelligence it begins to point in another way. But then somehow
thought and intelligence seem to fuse in a common function.
Krishnamurti: Yes. So we can ask: what is action in relationship
to intelligence? Right?
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: What is action in relation to intelligence, and in
the carrying out of that action is thought necessary?
Bohm: Yes; well, thought is necessary and this thought points
obviously towards matter. But it seems to point both ways - back
towards intelligence as well. One of the questions which always
comes up is: should we say that intelligence and matter are merely

a distinction within the same thing, or are they different? Are they
really separate?
Krishnamurti: I think they are separate, they are distinct.
Bohm: They are distinct, but are they actually separate?
Krishnamurti: What do you mean by the word "separate"? Not
related, not connected, with no common source?
Bohm: Yes. Do they have a common source?
Krishnamurti: That is just it. Thought, matter and intelligence,
have they a common source? (Long pause.) I think they have.
Bohm: Otherwise there could be no harmony, of course.
Krishnamurti: But you see thought has conquered the world.
You understand? - conquered.
Bohm: Dominates the world.
Krishnamurti: Thought, the intellect, dominates the world. And
therefore intelligence has very little place here. When one thing
dominates, the other must be subservient.
Bohm: One asks, I don't know if it is relevant, how that came
about.
Krishnamurti: That is fairly simple.
Bohm: What would you say?
Krishnamurti: Thought must have security; it is seeking security
in all its movement.
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: But intelligence is not seeking security. It has no
security. The idea of security doesn't exist in intelligence.
Intelligence itself is secure, not, "It seeks security."
Bohm: Yes, but how did it come about that intelligence allowed
itself to be dominated?

Krishnamurti: Oh, that is fairly clear. Pleasure, comfort,
physical security, first of all physical security: security in
relationship, security in action, security...
Bohm: But that is the illusion of security. Krishnamurti: Illusion
of security, of course.
Bohm: You could say that thought got out of hand and ceased to
allow itself to be orderly, ordered in general by intelligence, or at
least to stay in harmony with intelligence, and began to move on its
own accord.
Krishnamurti: On its own accord.
Bohm: Seeking security and pleasure and so on.
Krishnamurti: As we were saying the other day when we were
talking together, the whole Western world is based on measure;
and the Eastern world tried to go beyond that. But they used
thought to go beyond it.
Bohm: Tried to anyway.
Krishnamurti: Tried to go beyond the measure by exercising
thought; therefore they were caught in thought. Now security,
physical security, is necessary and therefore physical existence,
physical pleasures, physical well-being became tremendously
important.
Bohm: Yes, I was thinking about that a little. If you go back to
the animal, then there is instinctive response towards pleasure and
towards security: that would be right. But now when thought
comes in, it can dazzle the instinct and produce all sorts of
glamour, more pleasure, more security. And the instincts are not
intelligent enough to deal with the complexity of thought, therefore
thought went wrong, because it excited the instincts and the

instincts demanded more.
Krishnamurti: So thought really created a world of illusion,
miasma, confusion, and put away intelligence.
Bohm: Well, as we said before, that has made the brain very
chaotic and noisy and intelligence is the silence of the brain;
therefore the noisy brain is not intelligent.
Krishnamurti: The noisy brain is not intelligent, of course!
Bohm: Well that more or less explains the origin of the thing.
Krishnamurti: We are trying to find out what is the relationship, in
action, of thought and intelligence. Everything is action or inaction.
And what is the relationship of that to intelligence? Thought does
produce chaotic action, fragmentary action.
Bohm: When it is not ordered by intelligence.
Krishnamurti: And it is not ordered by intelligence in the way
we all live.
Bohm: That is because of what we have just said.
Krishnamurti: It is fragmented activity; it is not an activity of a
wholeness. The activity of wholeness is intelligence.
Bohm: Intelligence also has to understand the activity of
thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes, we said that.
Bohm: Now would you say that when intelligence understands
the activity of thought, then thought is different in its operation?
Krishnamurti: Yes, obviously. That is, if thought has created
nationalism as a means of security and then one sees the fallacy of
it, the seeing of the fallacy of it is intelligence. Thought then
creates a different kind of world in which nationalism doesn't exist.
Bohm: Yes.

Krishnamurti: And also division, war, conflict and all the rest.
Bohm: That is very clear. Intelligence sees the falseness of what
is going on. When thought is free of this falseness it is different.
Then it begins to be a parallel to intelligence.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: That is, it begins to carry out the implication of
intelligence.
Krishnamurti: Therefore thought has a place. Bohm: That is
very interesting because thought is never actually controlled or
dominated by intelligence, thought always moves on its own. But
in the light of intelligence, when the falseness is seen, then thought
moves parallel or in harmony with intelligence.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: But there is never anything that forces thought to do
anything. That would suggest that intelligence and thought have
this common origin or substance, and that they are two ways of
calling attention to a greater whole.
Krishnamurti: Yes. One can see how politically, religiously,
psychologically, thought has created a world of tremendous
contradiction, fragmentation, and the intelligence that is the
product of this confusion then tries to bring order in this confusion.
It is not that intelligence which sees the falseness of all this. I don't
know if I am making myself clear. You see, one can be terribly
intelligent although one is chaotic.
Bohm: Well, in some ways.
Krishnamurti: That is what is happening in the world.
Bohm: But I suppose it is rather hard to understand that at this
moment. You could say that in some limited sphere it seems that

intelligence is able to operate, but outside it doesn't.
Krishnamurti: We are, after all, concerned with living, not with
theories. One is concerned with a life in which intelligence
operates. Intelligence which is not of time, which is not of
measure, which is not the product or the movement of thought, or
of the order of thought. Now a human being wants to live a
different kind of life. He is dominated by thought, his thought is
always functioning in measurement, in comparison, in conflict. He
asks, "How am I to be free of all this in order to be intelligent?"
"How can the `me', how can `I' be the instrument of this
intelligence?"
Bohm: Obviously it can't be. Krishnamurti: That is just it!
Bohm: Because this thought in time is the essence of
unintelligence.
Krishnamurti: But one is thinking in terms of that all the time.
Bohm: Yes. That is thought projecting some sort of phantasy of
what intelligence is, and trying to achieve it.
Krishnamurti: Therefore I would say that thought must be
completely still for the awakening of intelligence. There can't be a
movement of thought and yet the awakening of that.
Bohm: That is clear on one level. We consider thought to be
actually mechanical and this may be seen on one level - but still the
mechanism continues.
Krishnamurti: Continues, yes...
Bohm: ...through instincts and pleasure and fear and so on. The
intelligence has to come to grips with this question of the
pleasures, the fears, the desires, which make thought continue.
Krishnamurti: Yes.

Bohm: And you see there is always a trap: this is our concept or
image of it, which is partial.
Krishnamurti: So as a human being I would be concerned only
with this central issue. I know how confused, contradictory,
disharmonious one's life is. Is it possible to change that so that
intelligence can function in my life, so that I live without
disharmony, so that the pointer, the direction is guided by
intelligence? That is perhaps why the religious people, instead of
using the word intelligence, have used the word God.
Bohm: What is the advantage of that?
Krishnamurti: I don't know what the advantage is.
Bohm: But why use such a word? Krishnamurti: It came from
primitive fear, fear of nature, and gradually out of that grew the
idea that there is a super-father.
Bohm: But that is still thought functioning on its own, without
intelligence.
Krishnamurti: Of course. I am just recalling that. They said trust
God, have faith in God, then God will operate through you.
Bohm: God is perhaps a metaphor for intelligence - but people
didn't generally take it as a metaphor.
Krishnamurti: Of course not, it is a terrific image.
Bohm: Yes. You could say that if God means that which is
immeasurable, beyond thought...
Krishnamurti:... it is unnameable, it is immeasurable, therefore
don't have an image.
Bohm: Then that will operate within the measurable.
Krishnamurti: Yes. What I am trying to convey is, that the
desire for this intelligence, through time, has created this image of

God. And through the image of God, Jesus, Krishna, or whatever it
is, by having faith in that - which is still the movement of thought one hopes that there will be harmony in one's life.
Bohm: And this sort of image because it is so total produces an
overriding desire, urge; that is, it overrides rationality... everything.
Krishnamurti: You heard the other day what the archbishops
and bishops were saying, that only Jesus matters, nothing else
matters.
Bohm: But it is the same movement whereby pleasure overrides
rationality.
Krishnamurti: Fear and pleasure. Bohm: They override; no
proportion can be established.
Krishnamurti: Yes, what I am trying to say is: you see the whole
world is conditioned this way.
Bohm: Yes, but the question is what you have hinted at: what is
this world which is conditioned this way? If we take this world as
existing independently of thought, then we have fallen into the
same trap.
Krishnamurti: Of course, of course.
Bohm: That is, the whole conditional world is the result of this
way of thinking, it is both the cause and the effect of this way of
thinking.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: And this way of thinking is disharmony and chaos and
unintelligence and so on.
Krishnamurti: I was listening to the Labour Party Conference at
Blackpool - how clever, some of them very serious, double talk
and all that, thinking in terms of Labour party and Conservative

Party. They don't say, "Let all of us get together and see what is the
best thing for human beings."
Bohm: They are not capable.
Krishnamurti: That is it, but they are exercising their
intelligence!
Bohm: Well, in that limited framework. That is what our trouble
has always been; people have developed technology and other
things in terms of some limited intelligence, which is serving
highly unintelligent purposes.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that is just it.
Bohm: For thousands of years that has been going on. Then of
course the reactions arise: the problems are much too big, too vast.
Krishnamurti: But it is really very simple, extraordinarily simple,
this sense of harmony. Because it is so simple it can function in the
most complex field.
Krishnamurti: Let us go back. We said the source is common to
both thought and intelligence...
Bohm: Yes, we got that far.
Krishnamurti: What is that source? It is generally attributed to
some philosophical concept, or they say that source is God - I am
just using that word for the moment - or Brahman. That source is
common, is the central movement which divides itself into matter
and intelligence. But that is just a verbal statement, it is just an
idea, which is still thought. You can't find it through thought.
Bohm: That raises the question: if you find it then what are
"you"?
Krishnamurti: "You" don't exist. "You" can't exist when you are
asking what is the source. "You" are time, movement,

environmental conditioning - you are all that.
Bohm: In that question the whole of this division is put aside.
Krishnamurti: Absolutely. That is the point, isn't it?
Bohm: There is no time...
Krishnamurti: Yet we still say, "I am not going to exercise
thought." When the "me" enters it means division: so
understanding the whole of this - what we have been talking about
- I put away the "me" altogether.
Bohm: But that sounds like a contradiction.
Krishnamurti: I know. I can't put it away. It takes place. Then
what is the source? Can it ever be named? For instance the Jewish
religious feeling is that it is not nameable: you don't name it, you
can't talk about it, you can't touch it. You can only look. And the
Hindus and others say the same thing in a different way. The
Christians have trapped themselves up over this word Jesus, this
image, they have never gone to the source of it.
Bohm: That is a complex question; it may be that they were
trying to synthesize several philosophies, Hebrew, Greek, and
Oriental.
Krishnamurti: Now I want to get at this: what is the source? Can
thought find it? And yet thought is born from that source; and also
intelligence. It is like two streams moving in different directions.
Bohm: Would you say matter is also born from that source more
generally?
Krishnamurti: Of course.
Bohm: I mean the whole universe. But then the source is
beyond the universe.
Krishnamurti: Of course. Could we put it this way? Thought is

energy, so is intelligence.
Bohm: So is matter.
Krishnamurti: Thought, matter, the mechanical, is energy.
Intelligence is also energy. Thought is confused, polluted, dividing
itself, fragmenting itself.
Bohm: Yes, it is multiple.
Krishnamurti: And the other is not. It is not polluted. It cannot
divide itself as "my intelligence" and "your intelligence". It is
intelligence, it is not divisible. Now it has sprung from a source of
energy which has divided itself.
Bohm: Why has it divided itself?
Krishnamurti: For physical reasons, for comfort...
Bohm: To maintain physical existence. So a part of intelligence
has been changed in such a way as to help to maintain physical
existence. Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: It has developed in a certain way.
Krishnamurti: And gone on in that way. Both are energy. There
is only one energy.
Bohm: Yes, they are different forms of energy. There are many
analogies to this, although it is on a much more limited scale. In
physics you could say light is ordinarily a very complex wave
motion, but in the laser it can be made to move all together in a
very simple and harmonious way.
Krishnamurti: Yes. I was reading about the laser. What
monstrous things they are going to do with it.
Bohm: Yes, using it destructively. Thought may get something
good but then it always gets used in a broader way that is
destructive.

Krishnamurti: So there is only energy, which is the source.
Bohm: Would you say energy is a kind of movement?
Krishnamurti: No, it is energy. The moment it is a movement it
goes off into this field of thought.
Bohm: We have to clarify this notion of energy. I have also
looked up this word. You see, it is based on the notion of work;
energy means, "To work within."
Krishnamurti: Work within, yes.
Bohm: But now you say there is an energy which works, but no
movement.
Krishnamurti: Yes. I was thinking about this yesterday - not
thinking - I realized the source is there, uncontaminated, nonmovement, untouched by thought, it is there. From that these two
are born. Why are they born at all?
Bohm: One was necessary for survival.
Krishnamurti: That is all. In survival this - in its totality, in its
wholeness - has been denied, or put aside. What I am trying to get
at is this, Sir. I want to find out, as a human being living in this
world with all the chaos and suffering, can the human mind touch
that source in which the two divisions don't exist? - and because it
has touched this source, which has no divisions, it can operate
without the sense of division. I don't know if I am conveying this?
Bohm: But how is it possible for the human mind not to touch
the source? Why does it not touch the source?
Krishnamurti: Because we are consumed by thought, by the
cleverness of thought, by the movement of thought. All their gods,
their meditations - everything is that.
Bohm: Yes. I think this brings us to the question of life and

death. This relates to survival; because that is one of the things that
gets in the way.
Krishnamurti: Thought and its field of security, its desire for
security, has created death as something separate from itself.
Bohm: Yes, that may be the key point.
Krishnamurti: It is.
Bohm: You can look at it this way. Thought has constructed
itself as an instrument for survival. Now therefore...
Krishnamurti: ...it has created immortality in Jesus, or in this or
that.
Bohm: Thought cannot possibly contemplate its own death. So
if it tries to do so, it always projects something else, some other
broader point of view from which it seems to look at it. If anybody
tries to imagine that he is dead, then he is still imagining that he is
alive and looking at himself as dead. You can always complicate
this in all sorts of religious notions; but it seems to be built into
thought that it cannot possibly consider death properly.
Krishnamurti: It cannot. It means ending itself. Bohm: That is
very interesting. Suppose we take the death of the body, which we
see outwardly; the organism dies, it loses its energy and therefore it
falls apart.
Krishnamurti: It is really that the body is the instrument of the
energy.
Bohm: So let us say the energy ceases to imbue the body and
therefore the body no longer has any wholeness. You could say
that with thought also; the energy in some ways goes to thought, as
to the body - is that so?
Krishnamurti: That is right.

Bohm: You and other people have often used the phrase: "The F
mind dies to the whole of thought." That way of putting it is
puzzling at first, because you would think it was thought that
should die.
Krishnamurti: Quite, quite.
Bohm: But now you are saying that it is the mind that dies, or
the energy that dies to thought. The nearest I can see to what that
means is, that when thought is working it is invested with a certain
energy by the mind or the intelligence; and when thought is no
longer relevant, then the energy goes and thought, as to the body-is
that so?
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: Now it is very hard for the mind to accept this. The
comparison between thought and the organism seems so poor,
because thought is insubstantial and the organism is substantial. So
the death of the organism appears to be something far more than
the death of thought. Now this is a point that is not clear. Would
you say that in the death of thought we have the essence of the
death of the organism as well?
Krishnamurti: Obviously.
Bohm: Although it is on a small scale, as it were, it is of the
same nature? Krishnamurti: As we said, there is energy in both,
and thought in its movement is of this energy, and thought cannot
see itself die.
Bohm: It has no way of imagining, or projecting, or conceiving
its own death.
Krishnamurti: Therefore it escapes from death.
Bohm: Well, it gives itself the illusion.

Krishnamurti: Illusion of course. And it has created the illusion
of immortality or a state beyond death, a projection of its own
desire for its own continuity.
Bohm: Well, that is one thing, that thought may have begun by
desiring the continuity of the organism.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that is right, and then gone on beyond it.
Bohm: Gone beyond that, to desire its own continuity. That was
the mistake, that was where it went wrong. It regarded itself as an
extension, not merely an extension, but the essence of the
organism. At first thought is functioning merely in the organism
and then thought begins to present itself as the essence of the
organism.
Krishnamurti: That's right.
Bohm: Then thought begins to desire its own immortality.
Krishnamurti: And thought itself knows, is very well aware that
it is not immortal.
Bohm: It knows it only outwardly, though. I mean, it knows it
as an outward fact.
Krishnamurti: Therefore it creates immortality in pictures,
images.
Krishnamurti: I listen to all this as an outsider and I say to
myself, "This is perfectly true, so clear, logical, sane; we see it very
clearly, both psychologically and physically." Now my question,
observing all this, is: can the mind keep the purity of the original
source? The original pristine clarity of that energy which is not
touched by the corruption of thought? I don't know if I am
conveying it?
Bohm: The question is clear.

Krishnamurti: Can the mind do it? Can the mind ever discover
that?
Bohm: What is the mind?
Krishnamurti: The mind, as we now say, or organism, thought,
the brain with all its memories, experiences and all that, which is
all of time. And the mind says, "Can I come to this?" It cannot.
Then I say to myself, "As it cannot, I will be quiet." You see the
tricks it has played.
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: I will learn how to be quiet; I will learn how to
meditate in order to be quiet. I see the importance of having a mind
that is free of time, free of the mechanism of thought, I will control
it, subjugate it, put away thought. But it is still the operation of
thought. That is very clear. Then what is it to do? Because a human
being lives in this disharmony, he must enquire into this. And that
is what we are doing. As we begin to enquire into it, or in
enquiring, we come to this source. Is it a perception, an insight, and
has that insight nothing whatsoever to do with thought? Is insight
the result of thought? The conclusion of an insight is thought, but
insight itself is not thought. So I have got a key to it. Then what is
insight? Can I invite it, cultivate it?
Bohm: You can't do any of that. But there is a kind of energy
that is needed.
Krishnamurti: That is just it. I can't do any of that. When I
cultivate it, it is desire. When I say I will do this or that, it is the
same. So insight is not the product of thought. It is not in the order
of thought. Now, how does one come upon this insight? (Pause)
We have come upon it because we denied all that. Bohm: Yes, it is

there. You can never answer that question, how you come upon
anything.
Krishnamurti: No. I think it is fairly clear, Sir. You come upon
it when you see the whole thing. So insight is the perception of the
whole. A fragment cannot see this, but the "I" sees the fragments
and the "I" seeing the fragments sees the whole, and the quality of
a mind that sees the whole is not touched by thought; therefore
there is perception, there is insight.
Bohm: Perhaps we will go over that more slowly. We see all the
fragments: could we say the actual energy, activity, which sees
those fragments is whole?
Krishnamurti: Yes, yes.
Bohm: We don't manage ever to see the whole because...
Krishnamurti: ...we are educated - and all the rest of it.
Bohm: But I mean, we wouldn't anyway see the whole as
something. Rather, wholeness is freedom in seeing all the
fragments.
Krishnamurti: That is right. Freedom to see. The freedom
doesn't exist when there are fragments.
Bohm: That makes a paradox.
Krishnamurti: Of course.
Bohm: But the whole does not start from the fragments. Once
the whole operates then there are no fragments. So the paradox
comes from supposing that the fragments are real, that they exist
independently of thought. Then you would say, I suppose, that the
fragments are there with me in my thoughts, and then I must
somehow do something about them - that would be a paradox. The
whole starts from the insight that these fragments are in a way

nothing. That is the way it seems to me. They are not substantial.
They are very insubstantial.
Krishnamurti: Insubstantial, yes. Bohm: And therefore they
don't prevent wholeness.
Krishnamurti: Quite.
Bohm: You see, one of the things that often causes confusion is
that, when you put it in terms of thought, it seems that you are
presented with the fragments that are real, substantial reality. Then
you have to see them, and nevertheless you say, as long as the
fragments are there, there is no wholeness so that you can't see
them. But that all comes back to the one thing, the one source.
Krishnamurti: I am sure, Sir, really serious people have asked
this question. They have asked it and tried to find an answer
through thought.
Bohm: Yes, well it seems natural.
Krishnamurti: And they never saw that they were caught in
thought.
Bohm: That is always the trouble. Everybody gets into this
trouble: that he seems to be looking at everything, at his problems,
saying, "Those are my problems, I am looking." But that looking is
only thinking, but it is confused with looking. This is one of the
confusions that arises. If you say, don't think but look, that person
feels he is already looking.
Krishnamurti: Quite. So you see, this question has arisen and
they say, "All right, then I must control thought, I must subjugate
thought and I must make my mind quiet so that it becomes whole,
then I can see the parts, all the fragments, then I'll touch the
source." But it is still the operation of thought all the time.

Bohm: Yes, that means the operation of thought is unconscious
for the most part and therefore one doesn't know it is going on. We
may say consciously we have realized that all this has to be
changed, it has to be different.
Krishnamurti: But it is still going on unconsciously. So can you
talk to my unconscious, knowing my conscious brain is going to
resist you? Because you are telling me something which is
revolutionary, you are telling me something which shatters my
whole house which I have built so carefully, and I won't listen to
you - you follow? In my instinctive reactions I push you away. So
you realize that and say, "Look, all right, old friend, just don't
bother to listen to me. I am going to talk to your unconscious. I am
going to talk to your unconscious and make that unconscious see
that whatever movement it does is still within the field of time and
so on." So your conscious mind is never in operation. When it
operates it must inevitably either resist, or say, "I will accept;
therefore it creates a conflict in itself. So can you talk to my
unconscious?
Bohm: You can always ask how.
Krishnamurti: No, no. You can say to a friend, "Don't resist,
don't think about it, but I am going to talk to you." "We two are
communicating with each other without the conscious mind
listening."
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: I think this is what really takes place. When you
were talking to me - I was noticing it - I was not listening to your
words so much. I was listening to you. I was open to you, not to
your words, as you explained and so on. I said to myself, all right,

leave all that, I am listening to you, not to the words which you
use, but to the meaning, to the inward quality of your feeling that
you want to communicate to me.
Bohm: I understand.
Krishnamurti: That changes me, not all this verbalization. So
can you talk to me about my idiocies, my illusions, my peculiar
tendencies, without the conscious mind interfering and saying,
"Please don't touch all this, leave me alone!" They have tried
subliminal propaganda in advertising, so that whilst you don't
really pay attention, your unconscious does, so you buy that
particular soap! We are not doing that, it would be deadly. What I
am saying is: don't listen to me with your conscious ears but listen
to me with the ears that hear much deeper. That is how I listened to
you this morning because I am terribly interested in the source, as
you are. You follow, Sir? I am really interested in that one thing.
All this is the explicable, easily understood - but to come to that
thing together, feel it together! You follow? I think that is the way
to break a conditioning, a habit, an image which has been
cultivated. You talk about it at a level where the conscious mind is
not totally interested. It sounds silly, but you understand what I
mean?
Say for instance I have a conditioning; you can point it out a
dozen times, argue, show the fallacy of it, the stupidity - but I still
go on. I resist, I say what it should be, what shall I do in this world
otherwise, and all the rest of it. But you see the truth, that as long
as the mind is conditioned there must be conflict. So you penetrate
or push aside my resistance and get to that, get the unconscious to
listen to you, because the unconscious is much more subtle, much

quicker. It may be frightened, but it sees the danger of fear much
quicker than the conscious mind does. As when I was walking in
California high in the mountains: I was looking at birds and trees
and watching, and I heard a rattler and I jumped. It was the
unconscious that made the body jump; I saw the rattler when I
jumped, it was two or three feet away, it could have struck me very
easily. If the conscious brain had been operating it would have
taken several seconds.
Bohm: To reach the unconscious you have to have an action
which doesn't directly appeal to the conscious.
Krishnamurti: Yes. That is affection, that is love. When you talk
to my waking consciousness, it is hard, clever, subtle, brittle. And
you penetrate that, penetrate it with your look, with your affection,
with all the feeling you have. That operates, not anything else.

J. KRISHNAMURTI AND PROFESSOR J.
NEEDLEMAN MALIBU, CALIFORNIA 1ST
CONVERSATION 26TH MARCH 1971
Needleman: Well, I'll repeat the first question that I wanted to put
to you: there is much talk of a spiritual revolution among young
people, particularly here in California. Do you see in this very
mixed phenomenon any hope of a new flowering for modern
civilization, a new possibility of growth?
Krishnamurti: For a new possibility of growth, don't you think,
sir, that one has to be rather serious, and not merely jump from one
spectacular amusement to another? Or if one is not creative in the
sense that one has looked at all the religions of the world and seen
their organized futility, and out of that perception they themselves
see something real and clear, perhaps then there could be
something new in California, or in the world. But as far as I have
seen, I am afraid there is not a quality of seriousness in all this. I
may be mistaken, because I see only these so-called young people
in the distance, among the audience, and I see them occasionally
here; and by their questions, by their laughter, by their applause,
they don't strike me as being very serious, mature, with great
intent. I may be mistaken, naturally.
Needleman: I understand what you are saying. My question
only is: perhaps we can't very well expect young people to be
serious.
Krishnamurti: That is why I don't think it is applicable to the
young people. I don't know why one has made such an
extraordinary thing out of young people, why it has become such

an important thing. In a few years they will be the old people in
their turn.
Needleman: Well, it seems as a surface phenomenon, aside
from what is underneath it all, this interest in the religious, or in
transcending experience - or whatever one wants to call it - seems
to be on the surface a kind of seed-ground from which certain
unusual people, certain Masters perhaps, aside from all the
phoneyness and all the deceivers, may spring up.
Krishnamurti: But I am not sure, sir, that all the deceivers and
exploiters are not covering this up. 'Krishna-consciousness' and
Transcendental Meditation and all this nonsense that is going on they are caught in all that. It is a form of exhibitionism, a form of
amusement and entertainment. For something new to take place
there must be a nucleus of really devoted, grave, serious people,
who go through to the very end of it. After going through all these
things, they say, "Here is something I am going to pursue".
Needleman: A serious person would be someone who would
have to become disillusioned with everything else.
Krishnamurti: I would not call disillusionment a form of
seriousness.
Needleman: But a precondition for it?
Krishnamurti: No, I wouldn't call it disillusionment at all, that
leads to despair and cynicism. I mean the examination of all the
things that are so-called religious, so-called spiritual: to examine,
to find out what is the truth in all this, if there is any truth in it. Or
to discard the whole thing and start anew, and not go through all
the trappings, all the mess of it.
Needleman: I think that is what I tried to say, but this expresses

it better. People who have tried something and it has failed for
them.
Krishnamurti: Not 'other people'. I mean one has to discard all
this, all the promises, all the experiences, all the mystical
assertions. I think one has to start as though one knew absolutely
nothing.
Needleman: That is very hard.
Krishnamurti: No, sir, I don't think that is hard. I think it is hard
only for those people who have filled themselves with other
people's knowledge.
Needleman: Isn't that most of us? I was speaking to my class
yesterday at San Francisco State, and I said I was going to
interview Krishnamurti and what question would you like me to
ask him. They had many questions, but the one that touched me
most was what one young man said: "I have read his books over
and over again and I can't do what he says." There was something
so clear about that, it rang a bell. It seems in a certain subtle sense
to begin in this way. To be a beginner, fresh!
Krishnamurti: I don't think that we question enough. Do you
know what I mean?
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: We accept, we are gullible, we are greedy for
new experiences. And so anybody with a beard, or no beard, with a
promise, saying you will have a marvellous experience if you do
certain things, people swallow it! I think one has to say: "I know
nothing." Obviously I can't rely on others and I am going to find
out. If there were no books, no gurus, what would you do?
Needleman: But one is so easily deceived.

Krishnamurti: You are deceived when you want something.
Needleman: Yes, I understand that.
Krishnamurti: So you say, I am going to find out, I am going to
enquire step by step. I don't want to deceive myself. Deception
arises when I want, or I am greedy, when I say, "All experience is
shallow; I want something mysterious" - then I am caught.
Needleman: To me you are speaking about a state, an attitude,
an approach, which is itself very far along in understanding for a
man. I feel very far from that myself, and I know my students do.
And so they feel, rightly or wrongly, a need for help. They
probably misunderstand what help is, but is there such a thing as
help?
Krishnamurti: Would you say: "Why do you ask for help?"
Needleman: Let me put it in a stupid way. You sort of smell
yourself deceiving yourself, you don't exactly know...
Krishnamurti: It is fairly simple. I don't want to deceive myself
- right? So I find out what is the movement that brings deception,
what is the thing that brings deception. Obviously it is when I am
greedy, when I want something, when I am dissatisfied. So instead
of attacking dissatisfaction, wanting, greed, I want something
more.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So I have to understand my greed. What am I
greedy for? Is it because I am fed up with this world, I have had
cars, I have had women, I have had money and I want something
more?
Needleman: I think one is greedy because one desires
stimulation, to be taken out of oneself, so that one doesn't see the

poverty of oneself. But what I am trying to ask - I know you have
answered this question many times in your talks, but it keeps
recurring, almost unavoidably - the great traditions of the world,
aside from what has become of them (they have become distorted
and misinterpreted and full of deceptions) always speak directly or
indirectly of help. And always say "The guru is yourself too", but
at the same time there is help.
Krishnamurti: Sir, you know what that word 'guru' means?
Needleman: No, not exactly.
Krishnamurti: The one who points. That is one meaning.
Another meaning is the one who brings enlightenment, lifts your
burden. But instead of lifting your burden they impose their burden
on you.
Needleman: I am afraid so.
Krishnamurti: Guru also means one who helps you to cross
over, and so on, there are various meanings. The moment the guru
says he knows, then you may be sure he doesn't know. Because
what he knows is something past, obviously. Knowledge is the
past. And when he says he knows, he is thinking of some
experience which he has had, which he has been able to recognize
as something great, and that recognition is born out of his previous
knowledge, otherwise he couldn't recognize it, and therefore his
experience has its roots in the past. Therefore it is not real.
Needleman: Well, I think that most knowledge is that.
Krishnamurti: Therefore why do we want any form of ancient
or modern tradition in all this? Look, sir, I don't read any books, no
religious, philosophical, psychological books: one can go into
oneself at tremendous depths and find out everything. To go into

oneself is the problem, how to do it. Not being able to do it one
says, please, help me.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: And the other fellow says, "I'll help you" and
pushes you off somewhere else.
Needleman: Well, it sort of answers the question. I was reading
a book the other day which spoke of something called 'Sat-san'.
Krishnamurti: Do you know what it means?
Needleman: Association with the wise.
Krishnamurti: No, with good people.
Needleman: With good people, Ah!
Krishnamurti: Being good you are wise. Not, being wise you
are good.
Needleman: I understand that.
Krishnamurti: Because you are good, you are wise.
Needleman: I am not trying to pin this down to something, but I
find my students and I myself, speaking for myself, when we read,
when we hear you, we say, "Ah! I need no one, I need to be with
no one", and there is a tremendous deception in this, I think too.
Krishnamurti: Naturally, because you are being influenced by
the speaker.
Needleman: Yes. That is true.
Krishnamurti: Sir, look, let's be very simple. Suppose, if there
were no book, no guru, no teacher, what would you do? One is in
turmoil, mess, confusion, agony, what would you do? And nobody
to help you, no drugs, no tranquilizers, no organized religions, and
all the rest of that nonsense, what would you do?
Needleman: I can't imagine what I would do.

Krishnamurti: That's it.
Needleman: Perhaps there would be a moment of urgency there.
Krishnamurti: That's just it. We haven't the urgency because we
say, "Well, somebody is going to help me."
Needleman: But most people would be driven insane by that
situation.
Krishnamurti: I am not sure, sir.
Needleman: I'm not sure either.
Krishnamurti: No, I am not at all sure. Because what have we
done up to now? The people on whom we have relied, the
religions, the churches, the rituals, education, they have led us to
this awful mess. We aren't free of sorrow, we aren't free of our
beastliness, our ugliness, our vanities.
Needleman: Can one say that of all of them? There are
differences. For every thousand deceivers there is one Buddha.
Krishnamurti: But that is not my concern, sir, if we say that it
leads to such deception. I can't understand what you are saying but
I want to help those who - etc., etc. No, no.
Needleman: Then let me ask you this. We know that without
hard work the body may get ill, and this hard work is what we call
effort. Is there another hard work which is necessary for what we
might call the spirit? You speak against effort, but does not the
growth and well-being of all sides of man demand something like
hard work of one sort or another?
Krishnamurti: I wonder what you mean by hard work! Physical
hard work?
Needleman: That is what we usually mean by hard work. Or
going against desires.

Krishnamurti: You see, there we are! Our conditioning, our
culture, is built around this 'going against', erecting a wall of
resistance. So when we say 'hard work', what do we mean?
Laziness? Why have I to make an effort about anything? Why?
Needleman: Because I wish for something.
Krishnamurti: No. Why is there this cult of effort? Why have I
to make effort to reach God, enlightenment, truth?
Needleman: There are many possible answers, but I can only
answer for myself.
Krishnamurti: It may be just there, only I don't know how to
look.
Needleman: But then there must be am obstacle.
Krishnamurti: How to look! It may be just round the comer,
under the flower, it may be anywhere. So first I have to learn to
look, not make an effort to look. I must find out what it means to
look.
Needleman: Yes, but don't you admit that there may be a
resistance to that looking?
Krishnamurti: Then don't bother to look! If somebody comes
along and says, "I don't want to look", how are you going to force
him to look?
Needleman: No. I am speaking about myself now. I want to
look.
Krishnamurti: If you want to look, what do you mean by
looking? You must find out what it means to look before you make
an effort to look. Right, sir?
Needleman: That would be, to me, an effort.
Krishnamurti: No.

Needleman: To do it in that delicate, subtle way. I wish to look,
but I don't wish to find out what it means to look. I agree this is
much more to me the basic thing. But this wish to do it quickly, to
get it all done is this not resistance?
Krishnamurti: Quick medicine to get it over.
Needleman: Is there something in me that I have to study, that
resists this subtle, much more delicate thing you are speaking
about? Is this not work, what you are saying? Isn't it work to ask
the question so quietly, so subtly? It seems to me it is work to not
listen to that part that wants to do it...
Krishnamurti: Quickly.
Needleman: For us particularly in the West, or maybe for all
men.
Krishnamurti: I am afraid it is all over the world the same. "Tell
me how to get there quickly."
Needleman: And yet you say it is in a moment.
Krishnamurti: It is, obviously.
Needleman: Yes, I understand.
Krishnamurti: Sir, what is effort? To get out of bed in the
morning, when you don't want to get up, is an effort. What brings
on that laziness? Lack of sleep, overeating, over-indulging and all
the rest of it; and next morning you say, "Oh, what a bore, I have to
get up!" Now wait a minute, sir, follow it. What is laziness? Is it
physical laziness, or is thought itself lazy?
Needleman: That I don't understand. I need another word.
"Thought is lazy?" I find that thought is always the same.
Krishnamurti: No sir. Let's find out. I am lazy, I don't want to
get up and so I force myself to get up. In that is so-called effort.

Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: I want that, but I shouldn't have it, I resist it. The
resistance is effort. I get angry and I mustn't be angry: resistance,
effort. What has made me lazy?
Needleman: The thought that I ought to be getting up.
Krishnamurti: That's it.
Needleman: All right.
Krishnamurti: So I really have to go into this whole question of
thought. Not make the body lazy, force the body out of bed,
because the body has its own intelligence, it knows when it is tired
and should rest. This morning, I generally do two hours of yoga
every day, this morning I was tired; I had prepared the mat and
everything to do yoga exercises and the body said "No, sorry". And
I said, "All right" and went to bed. That is not laziness. The body
said, "Leave me alone because you talked yesterday, you saw many
people, you walked yesterday, you are tired." Thought then says,
"You must get up and do the exercises because it is good for you,
you have done it every day, it has become a habit, don't relax, you
will get lazy, keep at it." Which means: thought is making me lazy,
not the body is making me lazy.
Needleman: I understand that. So there is an effort with regard
to thought.
Krishnamurti: So no effort! Why is thought so mechanical? And
is all thought mechanical?
Needleman: Yes, all right, one puts that question.
Krishnamurti: Isn't it?
Needleman: I can't say that I have verified that.
Krishnamurti: But we can, sir. That is fairly simple to verify.

Isn't all thought mechanical? The non-mechanical state is the
absence of thought; not the neglect of thought but the absence of it.
Needleman: How can I find that out?
Krishnamurti: Do it now, it is simple enough. You can do it
now if you wish to, it's very clear. Thought is mechanical.
Needleman: Let's assume that.
Krishnamurti: Not assume. Don't assume anything.
Needleman: All right.
Krishnamurti: Thought is mechanical, isn't it? - because it is
repetitive, conforming, comparing.
Needleman: That part I see, the comparing. But my experience
is that not all thought is of the same quality. There are qualities of
thought.
Krishnamurti: Are there?
Needleman: In my experience there are.
Krishnamurti: Let's find out. What is thought, thinking?
Needleman: There seems to be thought that is very shallow,
very repetitive, very mechanical, it has a certain taste to it. There
seems to be another kind of thought which is connected more with
my body, with my whole self, it resonates in another way.
Krishnamurti: That is what, sir? Thought is memory, the
response of memory.
Needleman: All right, this is a definition.
Krishnamurti: No, no, I can see it in myself. I have to go to that
house this evening - the memory, the distance, the design - all that
is memory, isn't it?
Needleman: Yes, that is memory.
Krishnamurti: I have been there before and so the memory is

well established and from that there is either instant thought, or
thought which takes a little time. So I am asking myself: is all
thought similar, mechanical, or is there thought which is nonmechanical, which is non-verbal?
Needleman: Yes, that's right.
Krishnamurti: Is there thought if there is no word?
Needleman: There is understanding.
Krishnamurti: Wait, sir. How does this understanding take
place? Does it happen when thought is functioning rapidly, or
when thought is quiet?
Needleman: When thought is quiet, yes.
Krishnamurti: Understanding is nothing to do with thought. You
may reason, which is the process of thinking, logic, till you say, "I
don't understand it", then you become silent, and you say, "By
Jove, I see it, I understand it." That understanding is not a result of
thought.
Needleman: You speak of an energy which seems to be
uncaused. We experience the energy of cause and effect, which
shapes our lives, but what is this other energy's relationship to the
energy we are familiar with? What is energy?
Krishnamurti: What is energy? Right, sir? First of all: is energy
divisible?
Needleman: I don't know. Go on.
Krishnamurti: It can be divided. Physical energy, the energy of
anger and so on, cosmic energy, human energy, it can all be
divided. But it is all one energy, isn't it?
Needleman: Logically, I say yes. I don't understand energy. I
experience something which I call energy, sometimes.

Krishnamurti: Why do we divide energy at all, that is what I
want to get at; then we can come to it differently. Sexual energy,
physical energy, mental energy, psychological energy, cosmic
energy, the businessman who goes to the office, with his energy,
and so on - why do we divide it? Why do we divide life as the
business life, scientific life, the professor's life, and life of the
housewife, why do we divide it all? What is the reason for this
division?
Needleman: There seem to be many parts of oneself which are
separate; and we divide life, it seems to me, because of that.
Krishnamurti: Why? We have divided the world into
Communist, Socialist, Imperialist, and we have divided the
Catholic, Protestant, Hindu, Buddhist, and we have divided
nationalities, linguistic divisions, the whole thing is fragmentation.
Why? Why has the mind fragmented the whole of life?
Needleman: I don't know the answer. I see the ocean and I see a
tree: there is a division.
Krishnamurti: No. There is a division. There is a difference
between the sea and the tree - I hope so! But that is not a division.
Needleman: No. It is a difference, not a division.
Krishnamurti: But we are asking why the division exists, not
only outwardly but in us.
Needleman: It is in us, that is the most interesting question.
Krishnamurti: Because it is in us we extend it outwards. Now
why is there this division in me? The 'me' and the 'not me'. You
follow? The higher and the lower. The Hindus have done it very
cleverly, the Atman and the lower self. Why this division?
Needleman: Maybe it was done, at least in the beginning, to

help men to question themselves. To make them question whether
they really know what they think they know.
Krishnamurti: Through division will they find out?
Needleman: Maybe through the idea that there is something that
I don't understand.
Krishnamurti: In me there is a division. In a human being there
is a division - why? What is the 'raison d'etre', what is the structure
of this division? I see there is the thinker and thought - right?
Needleman: I don't see that.
Krishnamurti: There is a thinker who says, "I must control that
anger, I must not think this, I must think that". So there is a thinker
who says, "I must", or "I must not".
Needleman: Right.
Krishnamurti: There is the division. "I should be", and "I should
not be". If I can understand why this division in me exists - Oh
look, look! Look at those hills! Marvellous, isn't it?
Needleman: Beautiful!
Krishnamurti: Now, sir, do you look at it with a division?
Needleman: No.
Krishnamurti: Why not?
Needleman: There wasn't the 'me' to do anything with it.
Krishnamurti: That's all. You can't do anything about it. Here,
with thought, I think I can do something.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So I want to change 'what is'. I can't change 'what
is' there, but I think I can change 'what is' in me. Not knowing how
to change it I have become lost, in despair. I say, "I can't change",
and therefore I have no energy to change.

Needleman: That's what one says.
Krishnamurti: So first, before I change 'what is', I must know
who is the changer, who it is that changes.
Needleman: There are moments when one knows that, for a
moment. Those moments are lost. There are moments when one
knows who sees 'what is' in oneself.
Krishnamurti: No sir. Sorry. Just to see 'what is' is enough, not
to change it.
Needleman: I agree. I agree with that.
Krishnamurti: To se 'what is: I can see 'what is' only when the
observer is not. When you looked at those hills the observer was
not.
Needleman: I agree, yes.
Krishnamurti: The observer only came into being when you
wanted to change 'what is'. Because you say: I don't like 'what is', it
must be changed, so there is instantly a duality. Can the mind
observe 'what is' without the observer? It took place when you
looked at those hills with that marvellous light on them.
Needleman: This truth is absolute truth. The moment one
experiences it one says, "Yes!" But one's experience is also that
one forgets this.
Krishnamurti: Forget it!
Needleman: By that I mean one continually tries to change it.
Krishnamurti: Forget it, and pick it up again.
Needleman: But in this discussion, whatever you intend, there is
help coming from this discussion. I know, as much as I know
anything, it could not happen, or I know fairly well, I', not sure,
that it could not happen without the help that is between us. I could

look at those hills and maybe have this non-judging, but it wouldn't
be important to me; I wouldn't know that that is the way I must
look for salvation, if you like, or for help, unless there was this.
And this, I think, is a question one always wants to bring. Maybe
this is the mind again wanting to grab and hold on to something,
but nevertheless it seems that the human condition...
Krishnamurti: Sir, we looked at those hills, you couldn't change
that, you just looked; and you looked inwardly and the battle
began. For a moment you looked without that battle, without that
strife, effort, and all the rest of it. Then you remembered the beauty
of that moment, of that second, and you wanted to capture that
beauty again. Wait sir! Proceed. So what happens? It sets up
another conflict: the thing you had and you would like to have
again, and you don't know how to get it again. You know, if you
think about it, it is not that, so you battle. "I must control, I mustn't
want" - right? Whereas if you say, "All right, it is over, finished",
that moment of beauty is over.
Needleman: I have to learn that.
Krishnamurti: No, no.
Needleman: I have to learn, don't I?
Krishnamurti: What is there to learn?
Needleman: I have to learn the futility of this conflict.
Krishnamurti: No. What is there to learn? You yourself see that
that moment of beauty becomes a memory, then the memory says,
"It was so beautiful I must have it again." You are not concerned
with beauty, you are concerned with the pursuit of pleasure.
Pleasure and beauty don't go together. So if you see that, it is
finished. Like a dangerous snake, you won't go near it again.

Needleman: (Laughs) Perhaps I haven't seen it, so I can't say.
Krishnamurti: That is the question.
Needleman: Yes, I think that must be so, because one keeps
going back again and again.
Krishnamurti: No. This is the real thing. If I see the beauty of
that light, and it is really extraordinarily beautiful, I don't know if
you see it, you can't do anything, you just see it. Now with that
same quality of attention I want to see myself. There is a moment
of perception which is as beautiful as that. Then what happens?
Needleman: Then I wish for it.
Krishnamurti: Then I want to capture it, I want to cultivate it, I
want to pursue it.
Needleman: And how to see that?
Krishnamurti: Just to see that is taking place is enough.
Needleman: That's what I forget!
Krishnamurti: It is not a question of forgetting.
Needleman: Well, that is what I don't understand deeply
enough. That just the seeing is enough.
Krishnamurti: Look, sir. When you see a snake what takes
place?
Needleman: I am afraid.
Krishnamurti: No. What takes place? You run, kill it, do
something. Why? Because you know it is dangerous. Either you
know the danger of it through tradition, through being told, don't
go near a snake. So you know. You are aware of the danger of it. A
cliff, better take a cliff, an abyss. You know the danger of it.
Nobody has to tell you. You see directly what would happen.
Needleman: Right.

Krishnamurti: Now, if you see directly that the beauty of that
moment of perception cannot be repeated, it is over. But thought
says, "No, it's not over, the memory of it remains." So what are you
doing now? You are pursuing the dead memory of it, not the living
beauty of it - right? Now if you see that, the truth of it, not the
verbal statement, the truth of it, it is finished.
Needleman: Then this seeing is much rarer than we think.
Krishnamurti: No, wait. If I see the beauty of that minute, it is
over. I don't want to pursue it. If I pursue it, it becomes a pleasure.
Then if I can't get it, it brings despair, pain and all the rest of it. So
I say, "All right, finished." Then what takes place?
Needleman: From my experience, I'm afraid that what takes
place is that the monster is born again. It has a thousand lives.
(Laughter.)
Krishnamurti: No sir. When did that beauty take place?
Needleman: The place when I saw without trying to change.
Krishnamurti: When the mind was completely quiet.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Wasn't it? Right?
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: When you looked at that, your mind was quiet, it
didn't say, "I wish I could change it, copy it and photograph it, this,
that, and the other" - you just looked. The mind wasn't in operation.
Or rather, thought wasn't in operation. Here thought comes
immediately into operation. So one has to say, "Now can thought
be quiet? How can one exercise thought when necessary, and not
exercise it when it is not necessary?"
Needleman: Yes, that question is intensely interesting to me, sir.

Krishnamurti: Sir, why do we worship thought? Why has
thought become so extraordinarily important?
Needleman: It seems able to satisfy our desires; through thought
we believe we can satisfy.
Krishnamurti: No, not from satisfaction. Why has thought in all
cultures with most people become of such vital concern?
Needleman: One usually identifies oneself as thought, as one's
thoughts. If I think about myself I think about what I think, what
kind of ideas I have, what I believe. Is this what you mean?
Krishnamurti: Not quite. Apart from identification with the 'me',
or with 'not me', why is thought always active?
Needleman: Ah, I see.
Krishnamurti: Thought is always operating in knowledge, isn't
it? If there was no knowledge, thought would not be. Thought is
always operating in the field of the known; mechanical, non-verbal
and so on, it is always working in the past. So my life is the past,
because it is based on past knowledge, past experience, past
memories, pleasure, pain, fear and so on, it is all the past. And the
future I project from the past, thought projects from the past. So
thought is fluctuating between the past and the future. All the time
it says; "I should do this; I should not do that; I should have
behaved." Why is it doing all this?
Needleman: I don't know. Habit?
Krishnamurti: Habit. All right. Go on. Let's find out. Habit?
Needleman: Habit brings what I call pleasure.
Krishnamurti: Habit, pleasure, pain.
Needleman: To protect me. Pain, yes pain.
Krishnamurti: It is always working within that field. Why?

Needleman: Because it doesn't know any better.
Krishnamurti: No. No. Can thought work in any other field?
Needleman: That sort of thought, no.
Krishnamurti: No, not any thought. Can thought work in any
other field except in the field of the known?
Needleman: No.
Krishnamurti: Obviously not. It can't work in something I don't
know; it can only work in this field. Now why does it work in this?
There it is, sir - why? It is the only thing I know. In that there is
security, there is protection, there is safety. That is all I know. So
thought can only function in the field of the known. And when it
gets tired of that, as it does, then it seeks something outside. Then
what it seeks is still the known. Its gods, its visions, its spiritual
states - all projected out of the known past into the future known.
So thought always works in this.
Needleman: Yes, I see.
Krishnamurti: Therefore thought is always working in a prison.
It can call it freedom, it can call it beauty, it can call it what is
likes! But it is always within the limitations of the barbed wire
fence. Now I want to find out whether thought has any place
except in there. Thought has no place when I say, "I don't know."
"I really don't know." Right?
Needleman: For the moment.
Krishnamurti: I really don't know. I only know this, and I really
don't know whether thought can function in any field at all, except
this. I really don't know. When I say, "I don't know", which doesn't
mean I am expecting to know, when I see I really don't know what happens? I climb down the ladder. I become, the mind

becomes completely humble. Now that state of 'not knowing' is
intelligence. Then it can operate in the field of the known and be
free to work somewhere else if it wants to.

J. KRISHNAMURTI AND PROF. J. NEEDLEMAN
MALIBU, CALIFORNIA 2ND CONVERSATION
26TH MARCH 1971
Needleman: In your talks you have given an utterly fresh meaning
to the necessity for man to become his own authority. Yet cannot
this necessity easily be turned into a form of humanistic
psychology without reference to the sacred, transcendent
dimension of human life on earth in the midst of a vast intelligent
Cosmos? Must we not only try to see ourselves in the moment, but
also as creatures of the Cosmos? What I am trying to ask about is
this question of cosmic dimension.
Krishnamurti: As soon as we use that word 'dimension', which
implies space, otherwise there is no dimension, there is no space.
Are we talking about space, outward space, endless space?
Needleman: No, not that.
Krishnamurti: Or the dimension of space in us?
Needleman: It would have to be the latter, but not totally
without the former, I think.
Krishnamurti: Is there a difference between the outer space,
which is limitless, and the space in us? Is there a difference? Or is
there no space in us at all and we only know the outer space? We
know the space in us as a centre and circumference. The dimension
of that centre, and the radiation from that centre, is what we
generally have, and call that space.
Needleman: Inner space, yes.
Krishnamurti: Yes, inner space. Now if there is a centre, the
space must always be limited and therefore we divide the inner

space from the outer space.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: We only know this very limited space and we
think we would like to reach the other space, immense space. This
house exists in space, otherwise there could be no house, and the
four walls of this room make space. And the space in me is the
space which the centre has created round itself. Like that
microphone space exists because of...
Needleman: Yes, centre of interest.
Krishnamurti: Not only centre of interest, it has its own space,
otherwise it couldn't exist.
Needleman: Yes, right.
Krishnamurti: In the same way, human beings may have a
centre and from that centre they create a space, the centre creates a
space round itself. And that space is always limited, it must be;
because of the centre, the space is limited.
Needleman: It is defined, it is a defined space, yes, which is
limited.
Krishnamurti: When you use the words 'cosmic space'...
Needleman: I didn't use the words 'cosmic space', I said cosmic,
the dimension of the Cosmos. I wasn't asking about outer space and
trips to the planets.
Krishnamurti: No, I don't mean that. So we are talking of the
space either between two thoughts. there is a space, an interval
between two thoughts.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: And the space which the centre creates round
itself.

Needleman: All right.
Krishnamurti: And having created that space round itself, there
is the space outside the limit. There is a space between thinking, a
centre round itself and the space beyond the barbed wire. Now
what is the question, sir? How to expand space? How to enter a
different dimension of space?
Needleman: Not how to but...
Krishnamurti: ...not how to. Is there a different dimension of
space except the space round the centre?
Needleman: Or a different dimension of reality?
Krishnamurti: Space, we are talking about that for the moment,
we can use that word. First I must see very clearly the space
between two thoughts.
Needleman: The interval.
Krishnamurti: This interval between two thoughts. Interval
means space. And what takes place in this interval?
Needleman: Well, I confess I don't know because my thoughts
overlap. I know there are intervals, there are moments when this
interval appears, and I see it, and there is freedom there for a
moment.
Krishnamurti: Let's go into this a bit, shall we? There is space
between two thoughts. And there is space which the centre creates
round itself, which is the space of isolation.
Needleman: All right, yes. That is a cold word.
Krishnamurti: It is cutting itself off. When I become important,
I consider myself as important, with my ambition, with my
frustrations, with my anger, with my sexuality, my growth, my
meditation, my reaching Nirvana.

Needleman: Yes, that is isolation.
Krishnamurti: It is isolation. My relation with you is the image
of that isolation, which is that space. Then having created that
space there is space outside the barbed wire. Now is there a space
of a totally different dimension? That is the question.
Needleman: Yes, that embraces the question.
Krishnamurti: How shall we find out if the space round me,
round the centre, exists? And how can I find out the other? I can
speculate about the other - but that is too abstract, too silly! I can
invent any space I like, god, you know.
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: So is it possible to be free of the centre, so that
the centre doesn't create space round itself and build a wall round
itself, isolation, a prison - and call that space? Can that centre cease
to be? Otherwise I can't go beyond it - I don't mean I - the mind
cannot go beyond that limitation unless that centre goes.
Needleman: Yes, I see what you mean. It's logical, reasonable.
Krishnamurti: That is, what is that centre? That centre is the
'me' and the 'non-me', that centre is the observer, the thinker, the
experiencer, and in that centre is also the observed. The centre
says, "That is the barbed wire I have created round myself."
Needleman: So that centre is limited there too.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Therefore it separates itself from the barbed
wire fence. So that becomes the observed. The centre is the
observer. So there is space between the observer and the observed right sir?
Needleman: Yes, I see that.
Krishnamurti: And that space it tries to bridge over. That is

what we are doing.
Needleman: It tries to bridge it over, but it doesn't.
Krishnamurti: It says, "This must be changed, that must not be,
this is narrow, that is wide, I must be better than that." That is the
movement is between the space, between the observer and the
observed.
Needleman: I follow that, yes.
Krishnamurti: And hence conflict between the observer and the
observed. Because the observed is the barbed wire which must be
jumped over, and so the battle begins. Now can the observer, who
is the centre, who is the thinker, who is the knower, who is
experience, who is knowledge, can that centre be still?
Needleman: Why should it wish to?
Krishnamurti: If it is not still, my space is always limited.
Needleman: But the centre, the observer, doesn't know that it is
limited in this way.
Krishnamurti: But you can see it, look. The centre is the
observer, let's call him the observer for the moment - the thinker,
the experiencer, the knower, the struggler, the searcher, the one
who says, "I know, and you don't know", is the centre. Right?
Where there is a centre it must have a space round itself.
Needleman: Yes, I follow.
Krishnamurti: And when it observes, it observes through the
space. When I observe those mountains there is space between me
and the mountains. And when I observe myself there is space
between me and the thing I observed in myself. When I observe
my wife, I observe her with the centre of my image about her, and
she observes me with the image which she has about me. So there

is always this division and space.
Needleman: Changing the subject entirely, there is something
called the sacred. Sacred teachings, sacred ideas, the sacred, which
for a moment seems to show me that this centre and this space you
speak about is an illusion.
Krishnamurti: Wait. I has learnt this from somebody else. Are
we going to find out what is the sacred, then? Are we looking
because somebody has told me, "Sacred is that", or that there is a
sacred thing? Or is it my imagination, because I want something
holy?
Needleman: Very often it is that but there is...
Krishnamurti: So which is it? The desire for something holy?
The imposition on my mind by others who have said, "This is
sacred?" And my own desire, because everything is unholy and I
want something holy, sacred? All this springs from the centre.
Needleman: Yes. Nevertheless...
Krishnamurti: Wait. We will find out what is sacred. But I don't
want to accept tradition, or what somebody has said about the
sacred. Sir, I don't know if you have experimented? Once some
years ago, for fun, I took a piece of rock from the garden and put it
on the mantelpiece and played with it, put flowers to it every day.
At the end of a month it became terribly sacred!
Needleman: I know what you mean.
Krishnamurti: I don't want that kind of phoney sacredness.
Needleman: It's a fetish.
Krishnamurti: Our sacredness is a fetish.
Needleman: Granted. Most of it is.
Krishnamurti: Therefore I want to find out. I won't accept

anything that anybody says about what is sacred. Tradition! Sir, we
were brought up in a tradition which would beat anybody's
tradition, as Brahmins, I assure you!
What I am saying is: If I want to find out what is holy, not manmade holiness, Jesus, I want to find out, how do I find out? I can
only find out when the mind has immense space. Right sir?
Immense space. And it cannot have that if there is a centre. When
the centre is not in operation, then there is a vast space. In that
space, which is part of meditation and all that, there is something
really sacred, not invented by my foolish little centre. There is
something immeasurably sacred, which you can never find out if
there is a centre. And to imagine that sacredness is folly. You
follow what I mean? It's too cheap.
Can the mind be free of this centre, with its terribly limited
space of yardage, which can be measured and expanded and
contracted and all the rest of it? Can it? Man has said it can't, and
therefore God who became the other centre. So my real concern is
this: whether that centre can be completely empty? That centre is
consciousness. That centre is the content of consciousness, the
content is consciousness; there is no consciousness if there is no
content. You must work this out.
Needleman: Certainly what we ordinarily mean by it, yes.
Krishnamurti: There is no house if there are no walls and no
roof. The content is consciousness and we like to separate them,
theorize about it, measure the yardage of our consciousness.
Whereas the centre is consciousness, the centre is the content of
consciousness, and the content is consciousness. Without the
content, where is consciousness? And that is the space.

Needleman: I follow a little bit of what you say. I find myself
wanting to say: well, what do you value here? What is the
important thing here?
Krishnamurti: I'll put that question after I have found out
whether the mind can be empty of the content.
Needleman: All right.
Krishnamurti: Then there is something else that will operate,
which will use this, which will function within the field of the
known. But without finding that merely to say...
Needleman: No, no, this is so. What you said now is clear.
Krishnamurti: Sir may I proceed a little bit? Let's begin. Space
is between two thoughts, obviously, between two factors of time,
two periods of time, because thought is time. Yes?
Needleman: All right, yes.
Krishnamurti: You can have a dozen periods of time but it is
still thought, there is that space. Then there is the space round the
centre, and the space beyond the self, beyond the barbed wire, the
wall of the centre. The space between the observer and the
observed, the mountain, space between the observer and my wife,
the space which thought as my wife has created the image, and the
image which she has about me, the space. You follow, sir?
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: All that is manufactured by the centre. To
speculate what is beyond all that - at least I can't do it, it has no
meaning to me personally, it's the philosopher's amusement.
Needleman: The philosopher's amusement, I agree.
Krishnamurti: I am not interested.
Needleman: I agree. I am not interested sometimes, at my better

moments, but nevertheless...
Krishnamurti: I am sorry, you are a philosopher!
Needleman: No, no, I don't want to interrupt you, please go on
Krishnamurti: I forgot you are a philosopher, sorry.
Needleman: No, why should you remember that!
Krishnamurti: So my question is: can the centre be still, or can
the centre fade away? Because if it doesn't fade away, or lie very
quiet, then the content of consciousness is going to create space
within consciousness and call it the vast space. In that there lies
deception and I don't want to deceive myself. I don't say I am not
brown when I am brown. So can that centre be absorbed? Which
means, can there be no image, because it is the image that
separates?
Needleman: Yes, that is the space.
Krishnamurti: That image talks about love, but the love of the
image is not love. Therefore I must find out whether the centre can
be completely absorbed, dissolved, or lie as a vague fragment in
the distance. If there is no possibility of that, then I accept prison.
Needleman: I agree.
Krishnamurti: I accept, no freedom. Then I can decorate my
bathroom for ever.
Needleman: But now this possibility that you are speaking
about, without searching for it consciously...
Krishnamurti: No, don't search for it!
Needleman: I say, without searching for it consciously, life or
something suddenly shows me it is possible.
Krishnamurti: It is there! Life hasn't to show me. It has shown
me now. It has shown me, when I look at that mountain, that there

is an image in me; when I look at my wife I see that there is an
image in me. That is a fact. It isn't that I have to wait for ten years
to find out a beastly little image! I know it is there, therefore I say:
"Is it possible to look without the image?" The image is the centre,
the observer, the thinker and all the rest of it.
Needleman: I am beginning to see the answer to my question. I
begin to see. I am speaking to myself, I am beginning to see that
there is no distinction between humanism and sacred teachings.
There is just truth, or not truth.
Krishnamurti: That's all. False and true.
Needleman: So much for that. (Laughter)
Krishnamurti: I am asking myself whether the content of
consciousness which makes up consciousness, obviously, without
the content there is no consciousness, that's an absolute fact.
Needleman: All right, yes.
Krishnamurti: Agree? Without the four walls and a roof there is
no house. Can the consciousness empty itself of its content? Not
somebody else do it.
Needleman: That is the question, yes.
Krishnamurti: Not divine grace, the super-self, some fictitious
outside agency. Can the consciousness empty itself of all this
content? First see the beauty of it, sir.
Needleman: I see it.
Krishnamurti: Because it must empty itself without an effort.
The moment there is an effort, there is an observer who is making
the effort to change the content, which is part of consciousness. I
don't know if you see that?
Needleman: I follow. This emptying has to be effortless,

instantaneous.
Krishnamurti: It must be without an agent who is operating on
it, whether an outside agent, or an inner agent. Now can this be
done without any effort, any directive, which says, "I will change
the content"? This means the emptying of consciousness of all will,
'to be' or 'not to be'. Sir, look what takes place.
Needleman: I am watching.
Krishnamurti: I have put that question to myself. Nobody has
put it to me. Because it is a problem of life, a problem of existence
in this world. It is a problem which my mind has to solve. Can the
mind, with all its content, empty itself and yet remain mind, not
just float about?
Needleman: It is not suicide.
Krishnamurti: No.
Needleman: There is some kind of subtle...
Krishnamurti: No, sir, that is too immature, childish. I have put
the question. My answer is: I really don't know.
Needleman: That is the truth.
Krishnamurti: I really don't know. But I am going to find out, in
the sense of not wait for me to find out. The content of my
consciousness is my unhappiness, my misery, my struggle, my
sorrow, the images which I have collected through life, the
frustrations, the pleasures, the fear, the agony, the hatred - that is
my consciousness, my gods. Can all that be completely emptied?
Not only at the superficial level but right through the so-called
unconscious. The unconscious, the hidden, through dreams, you
follow, all that completely emptied. If it is not possible, then I must
live a life of misery, I must live in endless, unending sorrow. That

means there is neither hope, nor despair, I am in prison. I can
invent a hope - oh, that's too childish. So the mind must find out
how to empty itself of all the content of itself, and yet live in this
world, not become a cuckoo, and have a brain that functions
efficiently. Now how is this to be done? Can it ever be done? Or is
there no escape for man?
Needleman: I follow.
Krishnamurti: Because I don't see how to get beyond this I
invent all the gods, temples, philosophies, rituals. You follow? All
the entertainment, all the muck comes in. Sorry! So I must find out.
You understand, sir?
Needleman: I understand.
Krishnamurti: This is meditation, real meditation, not all the
phoney stuff. To see whether the mind, with its brain, the brain
which has evolved through time, the brain which is the result of
thousands of experiences, the brain that functions only in complete
security efficiently, the brain that collected, you know, wounded,
hurt, all that, empty itself, and yet have a brain that functions like a
marvellous machine. Also it sees love is not pleasure; love is not
desire. When there is love there is no image; but I don't know what
that love is. I only want love as pleasure, sex and all the rest of it.
There must be a relationship between the emptying of
consciousness and the thing called love; the love, the unknown,
and the known, which is the content of consciousness.
Needleman: I am following you. There must be this
relationship.
Krishnamurti: The two must be in harmony. The emptying and
love must be in harmony. And it may be only love that is necessary

and nothing else.
Needleman: This emptying is another word for love, is what
you are saying.
Krishnamurti: I am only asking what is love. Is love within the
field of consciousness?
Needleman: No, it couldn't be.
Krishnamurti: Don't stipulate. Don't ever say yes or no; find
out! Love within the content is pleasure, sexual, ambitious you
know, all that business. Then what is love? I really don't know. I
won't pretend any more about anything. I don't know. There is
some factor in this which I must find out. Whether the emptying of
consciousness with its content is love, which is the unknown?
What is the relationship between the unknown and the known? not the mysterious unknown, God and a that business. We will
come to God afterwards, if we go through all this. The relationship
between the unknown, which I don't know, which may be called
love, and the content of consciousness, which I know, (I may be
unconscious of it, but I know, I can open it up and find out nonanalytically) - so what is the relationship between the known and
the unknown? To move between the known and the unknown in
harmony, is intelligence, isn't it?
Needleman: Absolutely.
Krishnamurti: So I must find out, the mind must find out, how
to empty its content. That is, have no image, therefore no observer.
The image means the past, or the image which is taking place now,
or the image which I shall project into the future. So no image,
which mean formula, idea, ideal, principle, all that implies image.
Can there be no formation of image at all? You hurt me, and

therefore I have an image of you, or you give me pleasure. So no
image formation when you hurt me or give me pleasure.
Needleman: Is it possible?
Krishnamurti: Of course it is. Otherwise I am doomed.
Needleman: You are doomed. In other words I am doomed.
Krishnamurti: We are doomed. Is it possible when you insult
me to be completely watchful, attentive, so that it doesn't leave a
mark?
Needleman: I know what you mean.
Krishnamurti: When you flatter me, or whatever, not leave a
mark. Then there is no image. So I have done it, the mind has done
it: which is, no formatting of image at all. If you don't form an
image now, the past images have no place.
Needleman: I don't follow that, that sounds just beyond my
grasp. If I don't form an image now?
Krishnamurti: The past images have no place. If you form an
image, then you are related to it.
Needleman: You are connected to the past images. That is right.
Krishnamurti: But if you don't form any?
Needleman: Then you are free from the past.
Krishnamurti: See it! See it!
Needleman: Very clear.
Krishnamurti: So the mind can empty itself of images by not
forming an image now. If I form an image now, then I relate it to
the past images. So consciousness, the mind, can empty itself of all
the images by not forming an image now. So there is space, not
space round the centre. And if one delves, goes into it much
further, then there is something sacred, obviously, not invented by

thought, which has nothing to do with any religion.
Needleman: Very clear.
I have another question which I wanted to ask you. We see the
stupidity of so many traditions which so many people hallow
today, but aren't there some traditions transmitted from generation
to generation which are valuable and necessary, and without which
we would lose the little humanity that we now have? Aren't there
traditions that are based on something real, which are handed
down?
Krishnamurti: Tradition being, handed over.
Needleman: Ways of living, even if only in an external sense.
Krishnamurti: If I hadn't been taught from childhood not to run
in front of a car...
Needleman: That would be the simplest example.
Krishnamurti: Or to be careful of fire, be careful of irritating the
dog which might bite you, the cat, and so on. That is also tradition.
Needleman: Yes, that certainly is.
Krishnamurti: The other kind of tradition is that you must love.
Needleman: That is the other extreme.
Krishnamurti: And the tradition of the weavers in India and
other parts, have their own tradition. You know, they can weave
without a pattern and yet they weave in a tradition which is so
deeply rooted that they don't even have to think about it. It comes
out with their hands. I don't know if you have ever seen it? In India
they have a tremendous tradition and they produce marvellous
things. And there is the tradition of the scientist, the biologist, the
anthropologist; which is, tradition as the accumulation of
knowledge, handed over by one scientist to another scientist, by a

doctor to another doctor, learning. Obviously that kind of tradition
is essential. I wouldn't call that tradition, would you?
Needleman: No, that is not what I had in mind. What I meant by
tradition was a way of living.
Krishnamurti: I wouldn't call that tradition. They wouldn't
generally call that tradition. We mean by tradition some other
factor? Is goodness a factor of tradition?
Needleman: No, but perhaps there are good traditions.
Krishnamurti: Good traditions is, conditioned by the culture in
which one lives. Good tradition, in India, among the Brahmins
used to be not to kill any human being or animal. They accepted
that and functioned. We are saying: is goodness traditional? Can
goodness function, blossom in tradition?
Needleman: What I am asking then is: are there traditions which
are formed by an intelligence either single, or collective, which
understands human nature?
Krishnamurti: Is intelligence traditional?
Needleman: No. But does intelligence which is not traditional,
can it form, shape a way of living which can help other men more
readily to find themselves? I know that this is a self-initiated thing
that you speak of but are there not men of great intelligence who
can shape the external conditions for me, so that I will not have
quite as difficult a time to come to what you have seen?
Krishnamurti: That means what, sir? You say you know.
Needleman: I don't say I know.
Krishnamurti: I am taking that. Suppose you are the great
person of tremendous intelligence and you say, "My dear son, live
this way."

Needleman: Well I don't have to say it.
Krishnamurti: You exude, your ambience, your feeling, your
atmosphere, your aura, and then I say, "I'll try it. He has got it, I
haven't got it." Can goodness flower in your ambience? Can
goodness grow under your shadow?
Needleman: No, but then I wouldn't be intelligent if I made
those my conditions.
Krishnamurti: Therefore you are stating that goodness cannot
operate, function, flower in any environment.
Needleman: No, I didn't say that. I was asking, are there
environments which can be conducive to liberation?
Krishnamurti: We will go into this. A man who goes to a
factory every day, day after day, and finds release in drink and all
the rest of it...
Needleman: This is the example of a poor environment, a bad
tradition.
Krishnamurti: So what does the man who is intelligent, who is
concerned with changing the environment, do for that man?
Needleman: Perhaps he is changing the environment for
himself. But he understands something about man in general. I am
talking now about a great teacher, whatever that is, who helps, who
presents a way of life to us which we don't understand, which we
haven't verified ourselves, but which somehow acts on something
in me to bring me together a little.
Krishnamurti: That is satsun - back to that - which is the
company of the good. It is nice to be in the company of the good
because we won't then quarrel, we won't fight each other, we won't
be violent; it is good.

Needleman: All right. But maybe being in the company of the
good means that I will quarrel, but I'll see it more, I'll suffer it
more, I'll understand it better.
Krishnamurti: So you want the company of the good in order to
see yourself more clearly?
Needleman: Yes.
Krishnamurti: Which means you depend on the environment to
see yourself.
Needleman: Well perhaps in the beginning.
Krishnamurti: The beginning is the first step and the last step.
Needleman: I don't agree.
Krishnamurti: Let's go into it a little bit. See what has happened.
I go with good men because in that ambience, in that atmosphere I
see myself more clearly, because they are so good I see my
idiocies.
Needleman: Sometimes it happens that way.
Krishnamurti: I am taking this.
Needleman: That is one example, right?
Krishnamurti: Or I am also good, therefore I live with them.
Then I don't need them.
Needleman: No we don't need them then. All right.
Krishnamurti: If I am good I don't need them. But if it's only
when I am not good and come into their presence, then I can see
myself clearly. Then to see myself clearly I must have them. This
is what generally takes place. They become important, not my
goodness. This happens every day.
Needleman: But is there not such a thing as weaning the baby
by blackening the breast? It happens that I do need this man,

maybe from the beginning.
Krishnamurti: I am going to question it, I want to find out. First
of all, if I am good I don't need them. I am like those hills and
birds, I don't need them.
Needleman: Right. We can rule that out.
Krishnamurti: When I am not good I need their company,
because in their company I see myself clearly; I feel a breath of
freshness.
Needleman: Or how bad I am.
Krishnamurti: The moment I have a horror of myself, in the
largest sense of the word, I am merely comparing myself with
them.
Needleman: No, not always. I can expose the image I have of
myself as a lie.
Krishnamurti: Now I am questioning whether you need them to
expose yourself as a liar.
Needleman: In principle, no.
Krishnamurti: No, not in principle. Either it is so, or it is not.
Needleman: That is the question.
Krishnamurti: Which means if I need them, then I am lost. Then
I will for ever hang on to them. Sir, this has happened since human
relationships began.
Needleman: Yes it has. But it also happens that I hang on for a
while and then I right it.
Krishnamurti: Therefore why don't you, the good man, tell me:
"Look, begin, you don't need me. You can watch yourself now
clearly."
Needleman: Maybe if I told you that, you would take it utterly

wrongly and misunderstand me completely!
Krishnamurti: Then what shall I do? Go on hanging onto you,
run after you?
Needleman: Not what shall you do, but what do you do?
Krishnamurti: What people generally do is run after them.
Needleman: They generally do, yes.
Krishnamurti: And hold on to their skirts.
Needleman: But that is perhaps because the teacher is not
intelligent.
Krishnamurti: No. He says, "Look, I can't teach you my friend, I
have nothing to teach." If I am really good I have nothing to teach.
I can only show.
Needleman: But he doesn't say it, he does it.
Krishnamurti: I say, "Look I don't want to teach you, you can
learn from yourself."
Needleman: Yes, all right. Suppose he says that.
Krishnamurti: Yes, he says learn from yourself. Don't depend.
That means you, being good, are forcing me to look at myself - not
forcing, I won't use that word, I withdraw that.
Needleman: Attracting you.
Krishnamurti: No. You are putting me in a corner so that I can't
escape.
Needleman: I see what you are saying. But it is the easiest thing
in the world to escape.
Krishnamurti: I don't want to. Sir, you tell me, "Don't depend,
for goodness has no dependency." If you want to be good you
cannot depend on anything.
Needleman: Anything external, yes all right.

Krishnamurti: On anything, external or inward. Don't depend on
anything. It doesn't mean just don't depend on the postman, it
means also inwardly don't depend.
Needleman: Right.
Krishnamurti: That means what? I depend. He has told me one
thing: "Don't depend on me or on anybody, your wife, husband,
daughter, politician, don't depend." That's all. He goes away. He
leaves me with that. What shall I do?
Needleman: Find out if he is right.
Krishnamurti: But I do depend.
Needleman: That's what I mean.
Krishnamurti: I do depend on my wife, on the priest, on some
psycho-analyst - I do depend. Then I begin. Because he tells me the
truth - you follow, sir? It is there, I have to work it out. So I have to
find out if it is the truth, or if it is a falsehood. Which means I must
exercise my reason, my capacity, my intelligence. I must work. I
can't just say, "Well he has gone. I depend on my cook!" So I have
to find out, I have to see the truth and the false. I have to see it.
That doesn't depend on anybody.
Needleman: Right.
Krishnamurti: Even the company of the good doesn't teach me
what is good and what is false, or true. I have to see it.
Needleman: Absolutely.
Krishnamurti: So I don't depend on anybody to find what is true
and what is false.

SAANEN 1ST PUBLIC TALK 18TH JULY 1971.
As we are going to have many talks and discussions we should, I
think, take things very easily, relax, and apply our minds to what
we are going to talk over together and to discuss. First of all, I'm
not at all sure what you, as an individual, as a human being, are
really interested in. I think one should find that out. What is your
primary interest, deep abiding intention, and in the discovery of it
relate that discovery to all the activities of one's life. One may be
interested, deeply concerned, with the world as it is - with the
violence, the appalling chaos, the political divisions, and the
corruption which is absolute death, not only outwardly but also
inwardly. In discovering for ourselves our major deep interest we
shall then find out for ourselves our relationship with each other
according to that interest. If that interest is rather vague,
superfluous, superficial, depending on the environment and on the
wind that blows in any direction, then our activities, both
outwardly and inwardly, will be casual, will have no deep abiding
significance. But if we could, during these coming talks and
discussions, find out what is our major interest. Sitting there as you
are, listening to what is being said, if you are really concerned with
the world and your place in the world, your relationship with
another human being, your relationship, politically, economically,
religiously, and socially, if you are really concerned - as you must
be - what is your real deep interest in life? Is it acquiring money please listen to all this very carefully - money, position, safety,
security? If that is your real, vital, continuous interest, then one
must see the consequences of such interest. And if it is your

interest, your really major drive - considering what the world is and
your relationship with the world - whether your interest is not only
to change yourself but also the world about you, and see all the
implications of that interest. If it is your interest that you want to
establish a personal relationship with another so completely,
wholly, so that there is no conflict, then also you must realize the
consequences of that.
And if your interest is - and this is much more difficult - to find
out what is the place of thought, as measure, and the immeasurable.
In trying to find out in which direction our interest lies, each one of
us - not the general interest but your particular interest - and
whether you are prepared to be completely dedicated to that
interest, not play with it, not casually accept it or reject it according
to circumstances, according to your own likes and dislikes, and
environmental influence.
So, if we are prepared, during these four weeks to go into this so
completely, knowing your interest, then we can establish a
relationship between yourselves and the speaker; and thereby also
establish your relationship with the world, and with your
neighbour, and with your intimate friend. So that is what we are
going to do during these weeks: find out whether you are prepared
to find out definitely where your major capacity and interest lies.
And whether that interest is isolated or that interest is related to all
human beings. If it is isolated, that is, you are seeking your own
particular enjoyment, your own particular salvation, your own
particular safety, a position in the world, then in talking it over
together we shall find out the validity of such interest, whether it
has any significance at all; and, if your interest, if your deep

purpose is to find out how to live a different life altogether.
Accepting things as they are, the violence, the brutality, the chaos,
the corruption, the hatreds, the enmities, seeing all that, whether
the human mind, your mind, each one's mind, is capable of
completely changing so that as a human being you not only bring
about a radical revolution in yourself but also outwardly. The
outward revolution and the inward revolution are not separate. We
are talking of revolution - not the physical violence of throwing
bombs, killing others in the name of peace, destroying. That is no
revolution at all, it is merely childish destruction. I do not know if
you have not observed all over the world - first the younger
generation were all giving flowers, living in a world of beauty,
imagination, then as that did not flower fully, then they take to
other kind of drugs and all the rest of it; and when that didn't work
they became violent. And we are now in a world of complete
violence. I do not know if you have been pursuing the events in the
East, in the Middle East and in America and elsewhere.
So one has to find out, if you are at all serious - and I hope you
are, because if you're not serious then it is not worth your sitting
down here for an hour, much better go for a walk, look at the
mountains, trees, and play around - but if you are very serious, and
I hope you are, then you have to find out, because we are getting
older, our days are becoming shorter, our capacities are becoming
more dulled as we grow older, and the world is becoming too much
for us. So it behoves each one of us to find out what your purpose,
your intention, your interest, the major one in life, is. Then if you
know we can discuss, we can then take a journey together. Because
the speaker knows exactly what his intention, his drive, his interest

is; and if your interest is quite different then our relationship
becomes difficult. But if your interest is to understand this whole
phenomenon of the world in which we, as human beings live - not
as technicians - then we can talk over together, then we can
establish our relationship together, then we can take a journey
together. Otherwise these talks and discussions will have very little
meaning. Please do bear this in mind, though you are here for a
holiday in the mountains and the hills and the streams and all the
tourist entertainments, in spite of all that, we have an opportunity
to sit together for a whole hour. You know that is quite interesting,
to sit together for a whole hour to talk over our problems together,
without any hypocrisy, without any pretence, without posing some
absurd facade. To have a whole hour together is an extraordinary
thing if you come to think of it, because we so rarely sit together to
talk over serious things with anybody for a whole hour. You may
go to the office for a whole day, but to spend together sixty
minutes and more to investigate, to examine, seriously, all our
human problems, with hesitancy, tentatively, with great affection not trying to impose an opinion over another, because we are not
dealing with opinions, ideas, or theories. What we are concerned
with is to establish a relationship with each other, and that can only
be done if we know our mutual interests, and how deep those
interests are, and what energy you have to apply to discover the
resolution of the major problems of our life. Because our life is not
different from the rest of the world. We are the world. I don't think
many of us realize, deeply, continuously, that we are the world,
and the world is us. I think this must be deeply, abidingly rooted in
us. Because we have made the social structure according to our

desires, according to our ambitions, greed, envy, violence, and if
we would change that society we must change ourself. That means
a simple, radical approach to the whole problem. But unfortunately
we think that by changing the outer structure - throwing bombs,
political divisions, and all the rest of it - that by some miracle we
shall all become perfect human beings. I'm afraid that will never
work.
Therefore, realizing that we are the world, really feeling it, not
as a verbal statement or a theory but actually feeling it in your
heart, and that is very difficult because our education, our culture,
has laid emphasis that you are separate from the world, that you as
an individual have a responsibility to yourself, and not to the rest
of the world; that you as an individual are free to do what you like,
in the limited sense. But we are not individuals at all, we are the
result of the culture in which we live. Individuality means the
individual, an entity who is not fragmented, who is whole. And we
are not that. We are broken up, fragmented, contradictory in
ourselves, therefore we are not individuals. So, seeing all that, what
is our major interest in life?
Take time to think it over, give it a few minutes. We can sit
together quietly, to find that out. Is it that you have sexual
problems and you have not been able to solve them, and therefore
that becomes the major problem? Is it that you want to live
peacefully, in a world that is so noisy, corrupt and violent? Is it that
you have many, many problems - economic, social, personal
relationships - and you would like to solve all those problems
completely, wholly? Or, does your interest lie in the direction of
social reformation, and you are dedicated to that, to the reform of

society? And if you are, then what is your relationship to that
society? And if you are interested to find out the limitation of
thought - and thought is limited, however capable, logical,
experimental and technical, having the capacity to invent, to bring
about a marvellous technological world, again this is a very limited
issue - if you want to find out if there is something more beyond
thought - the measurable and the immeasurable.
So, you have to look at all these problems. So where shall we
begin? You understand my question? Where shall we - you and I begin to discuss our problems? Shall we begin at that end, which
is, the measurable and the immeasurable, or, shall we begin to
discuss, to bring about change, at this end, which is, the physical
environmental change - with all its pollution, corruption, decay,
deterioration? So where shall we start? It's up to you!
Q: Sir, I am not sure that we are the world, and the world is us.
K: Is that your major problem? Don't bother about what I say.
Cut that our! What is your problem, what is your major interest,
and have you the energy, the capacity, the interest, the intensity, to
solve that problem?
Don't ask questions now, please, we'll have question time
presently. Do you follow? Let us now sit together, spend a couple
of minutes, to find out what your major interest in life is. This is
really very important to find out - not what the speaker says, that is
totally irrelevant, but what your interest is, and how far you are
going to give your energies to pursue that interest; how deeply,
how passionately, intensely - because if you have no passion, no
interest, no vitality, then - if I may point out - corruption has set in,
and where there is corruption there is absolute death.

So, from which end shall we begin - at that end, or this end? Or
can this be divided that way? Please listen to it carefully. Can this
whole movement of living, this whole existence of human beings,
be so easily divided? Please listen. Don't agree or disagree. Just
listen. First I will establish a physical security, a physical
relationship, complete order physically, socially, economically, and
after laying the foundation, building a complete house there, and
then move from there to the other. You are following? Or, is it a
total movement, indivisible, total, non-fragmented, but a complete
movement. Wherever you begin, the two are related.
You see we want complete physical order, and we must have
order - in our life as well as outwardly. Please listen to this. We
must have order. Not the military order, not the order of the older
generation, nor the disorder of the younger generation - the
permissive society is disorder, and therefore it is corruption, decay
- and the old order is also corruption and decay, with all their
violence, wars, snobbishness, division and all that. But seeing both
disorders, the permissive disorder and the ordered disorder of the
older generation, seeing both, one realizes that there must be a
different kind of order. Right? You are following? We are meeting
each other? Please, we are communicating with each other? And
that order must involve physical security for everybody. Right?
Not just for the few rich people or for a few people who are well
placed or have capacity, and so on, there must be physical security
for everybody. You understand? Over six million people from the
east have entered India. You understand what that means - not only
for the refugees but also for the poor country that is already poor!
And how can you establish order there? And that order - which is

total disorder - has been brought about by the older generation,
with their political divisions, their national and religious divisions.
You are following all this? And the disorder or the so-called
permissive thing that is going on with the younger people - because
they say that is disorder, we have nothing to do with the older
people, we want a different kind of order, and therefore we'll do
what we like. That's not order! Both are disorder. I wish you would
see this. And realizing that, one sees that there must be physical
order, physical security, for all human beings in the world.
You know this has been the dream of the revolutionaries, of the
idealists, of the philosophers, and they thought through physical
revolution they could establish it; and it has not succeeded - they
have had umpteen revolutions and it hasn't happened. Look at the
Communist world, with their divisions, with their armies, with
their totalitarianism and all the rest of the horror that is going on in
the rest of the world - and there is no order there either.
So, first one realizes through seeing all this that one must have
physical order. And does that order depend on law, on the
reorganization of the social environmental culture and influence or does that order depend entirely upon the human being, on each
one of us - the way we live, the way we think, the way we act in
our relationships with each other? Now, if we begin with that - that
is, living in a world that is so destructive, so chaotic, so violent and
all the rest of it, how am I, as a human being, you, as a human
being, to bring about order in this world? Does that order depend
on you or on the politician? Does that order depend on you, or on
the priest, on you or the philosopher, on you and an Utopian ideal?
Are you following all this? On what does that order depend? Are

we moving together? If you depend on the priest, or on the
politician, or on a theory, or on a belief, an ideal - then see what
takes place! Then you are conforming to the pattern set by the
politician, or by the theorist, or by an Utopian ideal, and hence
there is a conflict between yourself and what you think should be.
Please is that clear? And that conflict is part of this violence.
So are you prepared, is it your deep, real interest, to see,
perceive and understand that this order in society can only be
brought about by you, and by nobody else. We are responsible for
that order - by our conduct, by our way of life, our thoughts, the
whole of it - and is that your interest? Because one must live, when
the world is in such destruction and chaos, misery and suffering,
one must live - if you want to understand all this confusion - one
must live in total, complete order. And if you are interested, if you
give your energy, your capacity, your passion to find out what that
order is - then we can discuss. You have understood my point?
Then we can go into it. Then we shall share the thing together.
Then you won't be just an outsider looking in; then it's your
problem and you can put your teeth into it! Now, shall we proceed
from there, right? Shall we go from there? What do you say?
Q: Yes, yes.
K: Oh good! When you say 'yes' - stick to it. Don't change
tomorrow because you fall in love with a girl or a boy, or you see a
new motor car. There are beautiful motor cars, I've seen one! So if
that is your real, deep interest, then you must be passionate. Right?
Do you know what passion is? I'm not talking about lust. I'm not
talking about physical passion, sexual passion, I'm talking of that
passion which comes when there is deep interest. Say, for instance,

if one is deeply interested, not superficially, not because it brings a
reward, but really to find out if sorrow can end. Sorrow - you
know, the grief, the pain the anxiety, the fear - if that can ever
come to an end, then you will find that out of that comes real
passion, intensity. So now, if it is your intention to find out for
yourselves whether it is possible, living in this world, to bring such
order in yourselves, because you are the world, and the world is
you. Right? Now, let's proceed to ask questions. I've talked for
forty five minutes, I think. So let's proceed.
Q: You have said that you must have passion, but earlier you
said as you get older your passion becomes dull, so what must one
do?
K: Do our passions become dull as we grow older. Perhaps your
physical passions do, your glands don't work so efficiently. But we
are not talking about the passion of the young, or of the old, or
about the dissipation of that passion. We are talking when there is
an interest, you understand sir, an interest, a vital issue with which
you are concerned, as a human being - not with your technique,
with your gift, with your capacity - I'm not talking about that. If
you have an interest, and you live with that, then out of that life of
deep interest comes passion, which doesn't disappear because you
have got grey hair.
Q: What happens when you have this deep interest but also you
have the desire for pleasure?
K: I see. You have deep interest for something, and also you are
attracted by pleasure. Then there is conflict between the two, so
what is one to do? Is that the question?
Pleasure on the one hand and abiding, deep vital interest on the

other. Please, just wait - listen to it. Pleasure, and vital interest - do
they vary, is there a contradiction then? If I am vitally interested in
bringing about order in myself, and therefore in the world around
me, that becomes my deepest and most profound pleasure. I may
have a car, I may look at a girl, I may look at the hills and all the
rest of it - but they are all passing, trivial things which will not
contradict my abiding, vital interest which is my only pleasure.
You see we divide pleasure in ourselves: we say how lovely it
would be to have a marvellous car - or whatever it is. Sorry I must
not go back to cars! How lovely to hear music. There is great
delight in hearing music; it may pacify your nerves, it may quieten
you by its rhythm, beauty, its quality of sound may carry you away
to distant places and far away - and in that there is great pleasure.
But that pleasure does not deteriorate or diminish your vital
pleasure. On the contrary. When you have something of
tremendous importance in your life, and that very importance
becomes the pleasure, then all other pleasure becomes secondary.
In that there is no contradiction. But when we are not sure of our
major interest in life, then we are pulled in different directions by
different pleasures and objects, and then there is a contradiction.
So one has to find out - and I hope you will, during these days what is your major interest in which all abiding passion and
pleasure exist. But if you are not interested in it, if you don't take
tremendous pleasure in it, if you are not completely immersed in it,
passionately, vitally, intensely, then you are distracted by other
interests and then there is a contradiction. Is that clear?
Q: Do you not think that this order in the world can only come
by giving to God the place he should have in our lives? All the

chaos that exists in the world today is because we live without the
idea of God?
K: The gentleman says, if I have understood him rightly, that to
bring about this order should we give first place to god. Is that
right, sir? Now, wait a minute. You have all understood the
question? That if we have no knowledge of god, the feeling for
god, the understanding of that thing called god, then order becomes
mechanical, superficial, and therefore changeable. Right, sir? The
first importance, the questioner says, is god, and order then will
come out of that. Right? Now, please, sir, we are trying to
investigate the question, we are not trying to deny or to assert. We
are trying to find out. We are trying to enquire. Our difficulty is
that we all of us interpret according to our culture, our background,
our fear, pleasure, sense of security, and so on and so on. We try to
interpret or imagine what god is according to our background. That
is obvious. No? And the ultimate reality, not knowing it, not
having knowledge of it, can that bring order? Or, you must have
physical order first, which is measurable, and having established
that order then we can find out the immeasurable, in which order is
something entirely different. You understand the question? Are we
meeting each other, or have you forgotten the question!
You know, this has been the point of view of all the religious
people in the world. They say: concern yourselves with god, and
then you will have perfect order in the world. And each religion,
each sect, translates what that god is. And brought up in the culture
of belief, we accept that. Whereas if one really wants to find out
what god is, if there is such a thing, or something that is not
nameable, that cannot possibly be put into words, if that is the

major interest of your life, that very interest does bring order.
Which means that to find that reality I must live deeply differently.
There must be austerity without harshness; there must be
tremendous love. And love cannot exist if there is fear, or if my
mind is pursuing pleasure. So, to find that reality I must understand
myself, and the structure and nature of myself. And the structure
and nature of myself is measurable by thought. It is measurable in
the sense that thought can perceive its activity, what is has created,
what it has denied, what it has accepted. An when one realizes the
limitations of thought, then perhaps we can go into that which lies
beyond thought.
Q: The problem of parents is, what have we to teach to our
children?
K: Is this your question, sir - what have we to say to our
children? I'm sorry you have children. What have you to say to
your children in this chaotic world. Right? My Lord! Just a minute,
just a minute, let's go into it.
First of all, what is our relationship to our children? Please bear
in mind that we are investigating together. What is our relationship
to our children? You go off to the office if you are a man, and
come back late in the evening. If you are the mother you have your
own ambitions, your own drives, your own loneliness, your own
miseries, being loved and not loved, and all the rest of it, cooking,
washing dishes, and the children have to be looked after, and there
is not enough money, and so you also go off to earn. Right? The
Women's Lib - you know what that is, the liberation of women.
Then what is your relationship with the children - have you any?
Please, we are investigating, I'm not saying you don't have it; we

are enquiring. And, as they grow, you hand them over to the
school, right, where there are other children, equally lost, equally
imitative, conforming, forming gangs. And they enter this school to
be taught how to read and how to write. Enquire, please go into it.
You have the problem not only of your own children but also
the other children, who are gangsters, all together, imitating,
conforming, bullying. Right? What is your relationship with your
child? Now if you are really deeply interested in this one question:
which is, you have children, and you have to educate them rightly if that is your deep interest then you have to find out what is the
meaning of all education. Is it only to develop a particular kind of
technological knowledge so that they will earn a livelihood in a
world that is becoming more and more competitive, because there
are more and more people in the world and therefore less and less
jobs? For god's sake face all this. The world divided by nationality,
sovereign governments with their armies, navies, butcheries - if
you're only concerned with the development of technological
knowledge, then see all the consequences of that. The mind
becomes more and more mechanical, and when you lay emphasis
on the mechanical technological knowledge you neglect the whole
field of life. And as they grow older they enter college if they are
lucky - or unlucky - go to universities, and they are being more and
more shaped, conforming, put into a cage. Is that your interest? Is
that your responsibility? And because they don't want to be put into
a cage there is a revolt. And when that revolt does not produce any
results, there is violence.
So how are you, as a parent, to educate your children to be
different. Right? Can you form, or build a new kind of educational

system; or can you, with the help of others start a school which will
be totally different? That means that you have to have money,
people interested in the same thing, a group of people who are
really dedicated to it. And, if you are a parent, is it not your
responsibility to see that such schools are created. Which means
you must work for it. You understand, sirs, life isn't a plaything. Is
this your interest? If you are a parent, is this your interest? Or, are
you concerned, as a father, with your own ambitions, greeds,
envies, position, your office, your work, getting higher pay, more
refrigerators, and - carry on? You have to look at all this. So, where
does education begin - in the school, or with you? That means, are
you re-educating yourself all the time - as a parent, as a human
being?
Q: Is there anything in education, or are the children just going
to be what we are?
K: Is there such a thing as education or are our children going to
be exactly as we are? You know, I was told, Socrates, in Athens,
complained about the youth of his time. He said they had no
manners, no respect for their elders, they were becoming
permissive, and all the rest of it. That complaint was 300 or 400
BC. And we are still complaining about our children! So we are
asking: does education of the children consist in training them to
be like us, like other monkeys, or, does education mean not only
the understanding of the technological side of life but also the
whole neglected field of life - the whole of it, not just one fragment
of it, which means to include the psyche, all the emotions, you
follow, the whole business of existence? Because we neglect all
that and are only concerned with one fragment, then there is chaos

and violence in the world.
Q: Are you saying that we should have only one main interest?
Should we not be interested in many things, in war, in pollution.
You have to be aware of these things, don't you?
K: Sir, when there is a major interest, then you are interested in
everything.
Q: Everything is one.
K: Everything is one, I've said that. When I'm interested in
order, it is not only order in myself but order in the world. I don't
want wars. I feel for those people, because they have no order. You
know what is happening? Therefore I'm concerned with pollution
and poverty, war. Wars are created by nationalities, by
governments, politicians, the divisions of religious groups and all
the rest of it. In considering all that, I want order, not order for
myself. In wanting order I have to find order in everything around
me. Which means I work for order, I am dedicated to order, and I
am passionate for order. That means I have no nationality, no... you
follow, sir? Disorder is violence, therefore I must find out in
myself how not to be violent, to completely end all violence.
Q: Do you believe in demonstration?
K: Do you demonstrate, do you go up and down the street
demonstrating with a group of people who want to end the
Vietnamese war? War in Vietnam, or do you want to end all wars?
Right? Can you demonstrate to end all wars? Or can you only
demonstrate to end a particular war? Please do think about this,
give your heart to this. I can demonstrate for ending a war in the
Middle East or a particular war, but when I am concerned with the
ending of all wars, not only in myself but outwardly, how can I

demonstrate with a group of people? Can I? Do you also want to
end war, as I want to end war? You understand? It means no
nationality, no linguistic differences, no religious differences, and
all the rest of it. No my friends, you can't demonstrate for it, but
you have to live it. And when you live it, in that itself is a
demonstration.
Q: Do not love and truth bring about order?
K: But do we know what love is? Do we know what truth is?
Can you love if you are jealous? If you are ambitious? If you are
greedy? And is truth something fixed, established, or is it a thing
that is living, moving, vital, you follow? - and therefore no path to
it. You have to find this out.
I have talked for an hour and a quarter - we have - isn't that
enough for the first morning? We are going to have fourteen
mornings like this, so for the first, it's enough. You have enough
substance to chew over. Give your day to it until we meet the day
after tomorrow.

SAANEN 2ND PUBLIC TALK 20TH JULY 1971.
Shall we go on talking about what we were saying yesterday? We
were talking about order, and in a world that is so utterly confused,
divided, in a world that is so violent and brutal, observing this one
should have thought that our main interest in life would be to bring
about order, not only in ourselves but also outwardly. Order is not
habit. Habit becomes mechanical and loses all vitality, when
human beings become merely orderly in a mechanical sense of that
word. And order, as we were saying yesterday, covers not only our
own particular life but also all the life about us, in the world
outwardly and deeply inwardly.
How is one, being aware of this disorder, this confusion, how is
one to bring about order in oneself, without any conflict - please
listen to all this - without any conflict and not make it merely
habitual, routine, mechanical and neurotic? Right? Because one has
observed those people who are very orderly, they have a certain
rigidity, they have no pliability, they are not quick, they have
become rather hard, self-centred because they are following a
particular pattern which they consider is order, and gradually that
becomes neurotic; being aware of that, that order becomes
mechanical, neurotic, and yet one must have order in one's life.
How is this to come about? That is what we are going to consider
together this morning. I hope you have thought about some of the
things that we were discussing the day before yesterday, and you
are fairly alive with it.
First of all one has to have physical order, doesn't one? A highly
sensitive, if I may use the word 'discipline' - we will go into that

word - highly disciplined, sensitive, alive, not a sloppy body,
because that reacts on the mind. And how is one to have a highly
sensitive organism that doesn't become rigid, hard, forced into a
particular pattern which the mind thinks is orderly, and so forces
the body to conform to a pattern, or to a design set by the mind.
Right? We are following this? That is one of the problems, we will
come back to it.
Then also there must be order in the whole totality of the mind the mind being the brain; and the mind being the capacity to
understand, to observe logically, sanely, not to be caught in
contradictory desires, purposes, intentions. And this whole quality
of mind, how is it to have total disorder, the psychosomatic order,
without conformity, without the enforcement of a discipline
thought up by the mind, and a mind that can observe very clearly,
logically, sanely, and function totally, all round, not fragmentarily?
See our difficulty first, what is involved in all this. One has to have
order, that is absolutely essential. That we all agree to. Right?
What that order is we are going to investigate together, because in
the world there is the order of the older generation, which is really
total disorder as one observes in its activity in the world, in the
business world, in the religious world, in the economic world, in
the national world and so on, total disorder. And in reaction to that
there is the permissive society, permissive generation that does
quite the opposite to the older generation, which is also disorder isn't it? Please observe this. A reaction is a disorder. Right? And
how is the mind, with all the subtleties of thought, with all the
images thought has built about itself, the images that it has built
not only about another and what it should be, and therefore living

in a contradiction - the 'should be' and 'what is' - how is such a
mind to have complete, total order so that there is no
fragmentation, no reaction to a pattern which it thinks is right and
therefore contradictory, opposing, and out of that opposition arises
violence?
Now, seeing all that, how is the mind, your mind, to have
complete, total order in action, in thought, in every movement both
psychologically as well as physiologically. Right? I hope you see
the question first, you understand the question, see how
extraordinarily complex it is. And the religious people throughout
the world have said that you can have order only through a belief
in a higher life, belief in god, belief in something outside, and
according to that belief conform, adjust, imitate, force through
discipline your whole nature and structure of the psyche as well as
the physiological state. Right? And there is a whole group of
behaviourists who say that the environment forces you to behave,
if you don't behave properly it destroys you. And there is a whole
set of people who believe and conform to that belief, whether it is
the Communist belief, religious belief or a sociological, economic
belief.
So seeing all this, the division, the contradiction in us as well as
in society, in the world, and the counter culture against the culture,
the existing culture, all saying that there must be order in the
world. The military say this, there must be order; the priests say
there must be order and so on - you see it, there must be order. And
is order mechanical? Can order be brought about through
discipline? Can order be brought about through conformity,
imitation, control? Or order, about which we will talk, has nothing

whatsoever to do with all that; which is, it has nothing whatsoever
to do with control, with discipline in the ordinary accepted sense of
that word, it has nothing whatsoever to do with conformity, with
adjustment and so on.
Now let us look at this whole idea of control, whether it does
bring order - which doesn't mean we are talking against control, we
are trying to understand and because we understand we discover
something entirely different. You are following all this? Am I
going too fast? I hope you are as interested in it as I am, and as
passionate about it too, not just casually listen to a theoretical idea,
we are not discussing theories at all, or hypothesis, we are
observing actually what is going on, actually. And seeing what is
false, and the very perception of seeing what is false is the truth.
Right? Do you get it? You understand? I mustn't say the word 'get
it'. Right? Shall we go on?
So first what is implied in control? Because that is what all our
culture is based on, all our education, all the upbringing of
children, and in ourselves the urge to control. Now what is implied
in that? We have never asked why should we control at all? Now
we are going to go into that whole question. Control implies,
doesn't it, a controller and the thing controlled. Right? Please do
give your attention to this. Controller and the thing controlled. I am
angry, I must control anger. And where there is control there is
conflict - I must and I must not. And conflict obviously distorts the
mind. Right? A mind is healthy, clear, sane when it has no conflict
whatsoever, so that it functions without any friction. Then such a
mind is a sane, healthy mind. And control denies that. Right?
Because in control there is conflict, there is contradiction, there is

the desire to imitate and to conform to the pattern, which you think
you must do. Right? Is this clear? Shall we go on from there?
So control is not order. Please you understand? This is very
important to understand. Through control one can never have
order, because order implies to function clearly, seeing wholly,
without any distortion; but where there is conflict there must be
distortion, and control implies suppression, conformity, adjustment
and the division between the observer and the observed. Right?
Now please as you listen to what is being said the mind must be
freeing itself from the old culture of control. Right? Are you doing
it?
We are going to find out what it is to act or bring about order
without control - not that we are denying the whole structure of
control. We are, but we are seeing the falseness of it and therefore
out of that comes the truth of order. Have you got it? Are we
following each other? Yes? Following not verbally but actually,
doing it as we go along. Because what we are trying to do is to
bring about a different world altogether, a different culture
altogether, a human being who lives without any friction, and it is
only such a mind that is capable of living without any distortion
that knows what love is. Control in any form does breed distortion,
conflict and an unhealthy mind. And the old culture has said you
must discipline. And this discipline begins with children in
schools, in colleges, in families, all the way right through. Now
that word 'discipline' means not drilling, not conforming, not
suppressing, but that word means 'to learn'. You are following?
The word 'discipline' means to learn. A mind that is learning all the
time, all the time, is actually in a state of order. You are following

all this? It is the mind that is not learning that says, "I have learnt",
then such a mind brings disorder. Right? Are we going together?
You know I have never disciplined myself, never, about anything.
And the mind rejects being drilled, being mechanical, conforming,
suppressing - all that is implied in discipline. And yet we said there
must be order. Right? And how is this order to come into being
without the accepted meaning of that word discipline? Right? I
hope you are also working - are we? I am not the only worker here
this morning, am I?
We are asking: how is the mind to have order, total order,
psychosomatically, both physiologically as well as
psychologically, without control, without the accepted meaning of
that word discipline, and to be completely free without any sense
of conformity and imitation? Are we going along together? Right.
Seeing the problem, which is very complex, as we have seen, what
is your answer to this? If you are exercising your mind, if you are
really deeply interested in this question of order, not only in
yourself inwardly but also outwardly, what is your response to it,
how do you find an answer to this urge for order, which doesn't lie
in control, in the accepted sense of the word discipline, conformity
and also the total denial of authority, which is freedom. Right?
Because when you have authority then in that acceptance of that
authority there is conformity, there is a following and that breeds
contradiction, and therefore that does breed disorder. You are
following?
So no control in the accepted sense of that word discipline, and
the whole structure and nature of authority, which denies freedom.
And yet there must be order. Right? You know authority in the

sense of being imposed upon; the acceptance of your own
experience which then becomes the authority of your particular
knowledge or the knowledge of another. See the complications of
it. There is the authority of the law, the policeman, the civilized
law and so on. And the freedom from authority of the elders,
belief, the authority of one's own demands, experiences,
knowledge, all that denies freedom. So how is one, seeing all this,
not verbally only, but seeing the actual state as it is, and that is
what the world is, that is what our education is, that is what our
culture is - religious, economic, social, family relationship, all are
based on this, which has led to utter confusion, to great suffering,
wars, fragmentation of the world and human beings. Now seeing
all this, how is one to bring order? That is your problem. You
understand? How will you answer that problem if you are really
deeply passionately interested in trying to bring about order in your
life, as well as outwardly, what is your answer? Will you turn to
books, priests, philosophers, gurus, the latest person who says, "I
am enlightened, come and I will tell you all about it"? Whom will
you turn to find out how to live a life that is totally orderly,
denying all this, all the conformity, authority, discipline, control
and so on? Please you have to answer this question. Right?
Now can we together, because the speaker is not your guru,
absolutely not. I won't have it. Please realize this. Because I abhor
followers, they are the most destructive people. And you are not
learning anything from the speaker, nothing, therefore he is not
your authority. Right? So together, because you don't know, you
have only observed 'what is', and you don't know how to bring out
of 'what is' order. Right? You are following this? We have only

explained, observed together the fact of what is actually going on,
and you don't know what will be the outcome of this examination.
Right? And the speaker also comes to it afresh. So we are both of
us coming to the problem afresh - afresh in the sense you don't
know how to bring order out of this chaos. Because if you say,
"order should be that", then you are reacting to 'what is', in
opposition to 'what is' you are stating something which is a reaction
which has no validity at all. Right? So both of us are approaching
the problem anew. We have only examined the actual fact of what
is going on in the world and in ourselves, the actual fact. Now we
are going to find out together what order is. You are not accepting
anything the speaker says, please be quite sure. Then, if you do
accept it, our relationship changes entirely. But if we are together
examining, being totally interested in this issue, which is that,
realizing the state of confusion, disorder in the world, and in
ourselves, in our lives, how tawdry, disorderly it is, seeing the
actual fact and the intensity and the passion to find out what is
order.
So we are going to find out together - together. Therefore we
are going to find out what it means to learn. Right? Not from me,
but by observing 'what is' and learning from that. Right? Learning,
which means it is an active present of that verb to learn, which is a
constant movement of learning, not having learnt - having learnt
apply, which is quite different from learning all the time. You see
the difference? We are learning together. We are not storing up
knowledge and then acting according to that knowledge, then that
becomes contradiction. Then in that there is control and all the rest
of it begins. Whereas a mind that is constantly learning has no

authority, no control, no discipline, but the very learning demands
order. Right? Are you, please observe yourself, are you in a state of
learning, or waiting to be told? Please do watch yourself. Learning
or waiting for somebody like me to come and tell you what order
is? If you are waiting to find out from another what order is, then
you are dependent on that person, or on that book, or on that priest,
or on that structure and so on. So we are learning together. Is that
your state of mind, that you have understood control and all the
implications of that word, understood and therefore are free?
Understood what is implied in the full significance of that word
'discipline' and also are completely aware of the meaning of that
word 'authority'? Otherwise you can't learn, can you?
Learning implies a mind that is curious, that doesn't know, that
is eager to find out, terribly interested - is your mind like that,
interested, says, "I don't know what order is, I am going to find
out"? Very curious and passionate, deeply interested - is your mind
like that, and therefore willing to learn - not from another but learn,
the act of observation? Because control in the accepted sense of
that word discipline , authority prevents observation. Do you see
that? Do we see it? A mind can only learn when it is free, when it
doesn't know. Otherwise you can't learn.
So is your mind free to observe, to observe the world and
observe yourself? And you cannot observe if you are saying, "This
is right and this is wrong", "I must control, I must suppress, I must
obey, I must disobey" - you follow? All that is going on so you are
not free to learn. If you are saying, "I must live a permissive life",
then you are not free to learn. If you are conforming, you are not
free to learn. Right? Are you conforming when you have long hair,

beards? Am I conforming because I put on a shirt and trousers?
Short hair? Please find out. Conformity is not merely to a particular
pattern, to a particular structure of society, or a belief; but in little
things conforming. And such a mind is incapable of learning
because behind this conformity there is this whole sense of fear,
which the young have and the old have, and that is why they
conform.
So to find out what order is, and there must be order, a living
thing not a mechanical thing, a beautiful thing, you understand, the
order of the universe, the order that exists in mathematics, the
order that exists in nature, in the relationship between various
animals in nature, order, which we human beings have totally
denied because we in ourselves are totally in disorder, which
means contradictory, fragmentary, frightened, and all the rest of it.
Now I am asking myself, and you, whether my mind is capable of
learning because it doesn't know what order is. It knows the
reaction to disorder, but without reaction to find out our whether it
is actually capable of learning, and therefore free to observe. That
is, is your mind aware of all these problems - of control, discipline,
authority and the constant response of reaction, the structure - are
you aware of all this? Are you aware of all this in yourself as you
live from day to day? Or you are only aware when it is pointed out
to you? Please see the difference. You are only aware when it is
pointed out to you, or you are aware without it being pointed out,
you see it? Now which is it? Do please go into it. Which is it?
Because it has been pointed out to you, therefore you become
aware, which has its own other problems involved? Or are you
aware of this whole problem of confusion, discipline, control,

suppression - you know - conformity, all that because you have
been observing, living, watching. Then it is your own, whereas the
other is secondhand. Now which is it?
For most of us it is secondhand because we are secondhand
people, aren't we? All our knowledge is secondhand, our traditions
are secondhand. Perhaps only one or two activities are totally our
own, or not of another. So is one aware, are you and I aware, are
we aware that it is our own direct perception and not learnt from
another? Now if it is learnt from another one has to discard that
totally hasn't one? Right? You have to discard if somebody has told
you now, as it happened just now, that the implications of control,
discipline, authority and so on, then you become aware of all that
because it has been pointed out to you, that you must totally reject
in order to learn. Are you following all this? So if you have
rejected what others have said then you are actually learning, aren't
you?
Now let's find out together what order means - right? Now how
do you find out what order is when you don't know anything about
it - you understand? Are you following? Oh Lord, don't look so
blank, please! When you don't know anything about it, what order
is, how do you find out? You can only find out by enquiring what
the state of your mind is that is enquiring into order. You get what
I am getting at? You understand what I am explaining? Look - I
don't know what order is, I know what disorder is. I am completely
familiar with what disorder is, the whole culture of disorder of this
present society, I know it very well; but I don't know what order is.
I can imagine what order is, I can theorize about what order is, but
theories, imaginations, speculations are not order, therefore I

discard that. Right? So I really don't know what order is. Right?
My mind - please listen to this very carefully - my mind knows
what disorder is, how it has come about, what the culture, the
conditioning of that culture and the human beings, I know all that, I
am aware of all that, and that is total disorder. Now I really don't
know what order is. Now what is the state of the mind that says, "I
don't know"? You are following this? What is the state of your
mind that says, "I really don't know"? Is that state of mind waiting
for an answer, waiting to be told, expecting to find order? If it is
expecting to find order, if it is waiting to be told, then it is in a state
of not knowing. Right? Are you following this? I really don't
know. It is not waiting to be told, it is not waiting for an answer. It
is terribly alive, active, but it doesn't know. But it knows what is
disorder completely, and therefore rejects all that. Therefore the
mind, such a mind says, 'I don't know' is completely free.
Therefore because it has denied the disorder, because it is free it
has found order. Do you understand this? I am afraid you don't! It
is really marvellous if you go into this. Do please.
First of all we started out by saying there must be order in this
world. And we said order has been established by the older
generation with their culture, through control, through discipline,
through conformity, through suppression, through authority,
imposition, fear, domination, heaven and hell. And in observing
that closely because all that is oneself, one sees there is total
disorder both outwardly and inwardly, except occasional patches of
clarity, that is not order, they are just patches. And the interest, the
passion, the intensity to have order denies all the culture which has
brought about disorder. You are following all this? It has denied it.

That is not order. Nor is it order, the permissive society, that is not
order either, with their violence, with their peculiar - and all the
rest of it. And I don't know what order is and I am not waiting for
somebody to tell me what order is. And my mind, because it has
denied everything that is disorder, totally without holding back a
thing, it has emptied the cupboard completely, therefore it is free,
therefore it is capable of learning. And because it is so totally free,
which means non-fragmented, it is in a state of order. Have you
understood this?
Now is your mind in order? Totally? Otherwise don't go any
further. Nobody, no teacher, no guru, no saviour, no ancient
philosophers or moderns, nobody can teach you what order is,
therefore you deny all authority, therefore you are free from fear to
find out what order is. Now are you aware of your mind, are you
aware of yourself, your life, not the holiday life, not the life of
sitting here for an hour listening to a talk, but your daily life, your
family life, the life of your relationship with each other. Are you
aware in that life, the daily life, the monotony, the boredom, the
routine, the office, the quarrels, the nagging, the brutalities, the
violence - are you aware of all that as the result of a culture that is
totally disorder - your life? And being aware you can't out of that
disorder pick and choose what you think is order. Right? So are
you aware that one's life is disorderly. And the interest, the passion,
the intensity to find order, the flame of it, if you haven't got that
flame then you will pick and choose what you think is order out of
disorder. So can you honestly observing yourself - you know with
great honesty, without any sense of hypocrisy, double talk - know
for yourself that your life is disorderly, and can you put all that

aside to find out what order is?
You know putting aside disorder is not so very difficult. I know
we make a lot of tragedy and a lot of excitement and all the rest of
it. You know when you see something very dangerous, a precipice,
an animal, or a man who is dangerous, you avoid it instantly, don't
you, don't you? There is no arguing, there is no hesitation, there is
no temporizing, there is immediate action. In the same way when
you see the danger, complete danger of disorder, there is instant
action which is the denial, total denial, of the whole culture which
has brought about this disorder, which is yourself. Right? I had
better stop. Now perhaps you would ask questions about all this.
Q: Is it a problem of how to look because we are not free?
K: The questioner says, is it not a question of how to look. Isn't
that right sir? Is that it? Are you, is one free to look? That is what
we have been saying. We are not free to look. You don't want to
look, do you? Do you really want to look at all the things which
you hold, which you cherish, which you think is important, which
is also surrounded by a lot of confusion, are you capable of looking
at all that? Come on sirs, it is not my problem. Are you capable of
looking at yourself without any distortion? Have you ever looked
at yourself, not with one image looking at other images? You are
following?
Q: Aren't we here conforming to a certain pattern? You
speaking for one hour and then us asking a few questions. Is that a
pattern too?
K: Is that a pattern? I talk for a hour, people ask questions, is
that a pattern too? You can make anything into a pattern. Sitting on
a chair is a pattern, sitting on the ground becomes a pattern. But is

this a pattern? If it is a pattern let's break it up. Shall I sit on the
platform, would that make any difference, and you talk for an hour
and I'll listen? (Laughter) No I am not joking, please.
You see I am asking a question, which is: have you ever looked
at yourself? Not in the mirror, your face, your make-up and all the
rest of it, have you ever looked at yourself? Do you know what it
means to look at yourself? To look at yourself actually as you are?
Does that frighten you? You are frightened because you have an
image about yourself, haven't you? You think, I am better than that,
I am more noble than that, or how dreadfully ugly I am, how old,
how decrepit, how diseased, how silly I am. All this prevents you
from looking, doesn't it? No? I just want to see myself as I am. I
don't want to pick and choose out of what I see. I just want to look.
Does that take a great deal of courage? No, sorry. My interest to
observe what I am makes me look, not my fear of finding out what
I am. I don't know if you are meeting this. I am really vitally,
tremendously interested in seeing what I am, whatever it is - are
you? My relationships, whether I lie or tell the truth, whether I am
frightened, whether I am greedy, ambitious, you know all the
subtle movements that creep in and out of my life. Now how do I
look at myself? Is my mind capable of looking at itself? That
means, does one thought, separating itself, look at various other
thoughts? Then that one thought that has separated itself from other
thoughts, then that thought says, "this is right", "this is wrong",
"this is good", "this is bad", "this I shall keep," "this I won't keep",
"how frightened I am", "how ugly" - you follow? Now is that
looking? When one thought separates itself from the rest of the
other thoughts, is such a thought capable of looking? Or you can

only look at yourself when there is no fragmentation of thought? Is
all this becoming too difficult? Yes? I don't know why.
Q: May I ask a question?
K: Yes.
Q: Is operation on the fact one of the ways of avoiding a crisis?
K: Is the operation on a fact, wanting to do something about the
fact, is that one of the ways of avoiding the crisis. Just hold a
minute sir, we'll answer that but first just listen to this.
Have you ever looked at yourself? Your face, how you behave,
why you behave in a certain way, your nervous reactions, the
twitching of your fingers of which you are not aware at all,
unconscious of what your body is doing, are you aware of all that?
How you walk, how you talk, how you listen? And are you aware
of yourself, your thoughts, your feelings, your inner motives,
completely aware? Just observing, not correcting, just to look.
Q: It is very difficult not to analyse.
K: When you are analysing you are not looking.
Q: I know.
K: You don't know otherwise you wouldn't analyse. Look, I
want to see what is in the cupboard of my mind, what is stored up
there, I want to read all the things it contains because the content of
the mind is the mind. Right? Are you following this? Is this
becoming too difficult? I want to see what I am, not only during
the waking hours - walking, talking, gestures, making gestures,
office, sex, anger, pleasure, the delight of seeing the hills, the
streams, trees, the birds, the clouds, in the waking hours - but also I
want to see myself when I am asleep, what is going on. Don't you?
Don't you? Oh, no you don't! You think you do. Do you know what

it means when you want to learn about yourself? It means hard
work, daily observation, watching, watching, watching. Which
doesn't mean self-centred watching, just watching, like watching a
bird, the movement of a cloud, you can't change the movement of a
cloud. So in the same way watch.
And the next question is: can the mind be watchful of what it is
doing when it is asleep? I won't go into that, that is too - we'll go
into that later if you want to.
Q: I would like to look at our relationship - you to us. You say
you are not a guru but you talk and we listen. We ask questions and
you answer them. So could we look at our relationship?
K: Could we look at our relationship. You talk, we listen and
we seem to absorb what you are saying and so could we discuss
our relationship? Right sir? Are we together taking a journey,
together? Or are you merely following? It is for you to tell me, not
for me to tell you. What is it that you are doing? Together or being
led? Which is it? If you are being led, if you are following, there is
no relationship, because he says, "Don't follow". He is not your
authority, your guru. But if you insist on following, if you insist on
listening in order to learn what he is saying, then we have no
relationship, have we? But if you say, "Look, I want to learn, we
are together, taking a journey together into this extraordinary world
in which we live, in the world which is me, and I want to penetrate
into that me, I want to learn", then we are together, we have a
relationship. Right?
Q: Is it really together if the physical situation is so. You sit
above here and we are sitting down there.
K: Doesn't it make a difference when you sit on a platform and

we sit down below. I happen to sit on a platform because it is more
convenient, because you can see the poor chap and he can see you.
If I sat down there none of them could see me. Surely height
doesn't make any difference, does it, when we are talking of taking
a journey together whether you are tall, short, or whether you are
broad or wide or sitting - we are taking a journey together into a
world in which there is neither height nor depth, not breadth. It is
the world that we are trying to understand.
So I'll come back to this question, which is: have you ever
looked at yourself? Have you ever looked at yourself for any
length of time, as you look at yourself in the mirror when you
shave, when you brush your hair, when you make-up and all the
rest of it? Have you ever spent ten minutes, as you do at a mirror,
watching yourself, without any choice, without any sense of
judgement or evaluation, just watch yourself? Shall we go into all
that the day after tomorrow?

SAANEN 3RD PUBLIC TALK 22ND JULY 1971.
We said that we would be talking over together this problem of
looking at ourselves. I wish some of you would go into this instead
of me. First of all, I feel, most of us live rather a superficial life and
are content to lead such a life, and meet all the problems of our
existence superficially and thereby increase our problems because
our problems are very complex, rather deep and need a great deal
of penetration and understanding. But most of us would like to
treat all problems rather superficially according to the old tradition,
or adjust ourselves to a modern tendency and never resolve totally
and completely any of our problems, such as war, conflict,
violence and so on. And we are also apt to look at ourselves rather
superficially, not knowing how to penetrate deeply into ourselves.
Either we observe ourselves with a certain disgust, with a certain
conclusion already made up, or look at ourselves hoping to change
what we are.
I think it is important, don't you, that we should understand
ourselves totally, completely, because as we said the other day, we
are the world, and the world is us. This is an absolute fact, and it is
not a mere verbal statement, or a theory, but something that one
feels deeply, with all the agony of it, the suffering, the pleasure, the
brutality, the fragmentation of nationalities, religions. And one can
never solve any of these problems without really understanding
ourselves, because ourselves is the world. And if I understand
myself there is a living at a totally different dimension. And to
really penetrate, not only at the conscious level of our being, but
also at depth; and is it possible for each one of us to understand

ourselves, not only the superficial structure of our minds but also at
the deep, not conscious level? And as we said the day before
yesterday that is what we are going to talk over together.
When we say: we are going to talk over together, it doesn't
mean that I talk and you listen, but we are going to share together. I
really mean it - share it. Otherwise it will be no fun at all, for you
or for me. And how am I, or you, how is one to look at oneself? Is
it possible to look at oneself completely, without the division of the
conscious and the deeper layers of the conscious of which we are
totally, perhaps, unaware? Is it possible to observe, see the whole
movement of the 'me', the self, the what I am, with a non-analytical
mind, so that in the very observation of it there is a total
understanding instantly? That is what we are going to go into. So
please, as we said, we are going to share it together. You are going
to work as hard as I am going to. It is rather hot but let us sweat it
out because this is a very important question. This has been the
problem right through the religious life, throughout the various
cultures, whether one can go beyond oneself to find reality, to find
something that is not measurable by the mind, without any
illusion? And in the process of this search to go beyond oneself,
one has been caught in various forms of myths, the Christian myth,
the Hindu myth, the whole mythological world, which becomes
totally unnecessary and irrelevant.
So is it possible to look at ourselves non-analytically and
therefore observe without the 'me' observing? We will go into all
this. I want to understand myself and I know myself is very
complex, it is a living thing, not a dead series of memories,
accidents, experiences, knowledge; it is a living, moving, vital

thing. You can't say, "I am static" - it is impossible. It is a living
thing, as society is a living thing, because we have created it. Now,
is it possible to look without the observer looking at the thing
called the observed? Do you understand my question? Because if
there is the observer looking, he looks invariably through
fragmentation, through division, and therefore wherever there is
division, both in myself and outwardly, there must be conflict - the
national conflicts outwardly, the religious conflicts outwardly, the
economic and so on. And inwardly there is this vast field, not only
superficially observed, but a wide area about which we know
almost nothing. So where there is an observation in which there is
division as the 'I' and the 'not I', or the observer and the observed,
or as the thinker and the thought, or the experiencer and the
experience, in which there is a division, then there is conflict.
Please let us be clear on this point, all of us, not just you and I, one
of us, all of us. When I look at myself as an outsider observing
within then there is division, obviously. You as a Christian, and if I
happen to be a Communist, then there is a battle between us. You a
Hindu, Muslin and all that, there is conflict. Similarly when there is
a division in our observation, that I different from the thing I look
at, then invariably there must be conflict - right? Please it is not a
verbal communication, this is an actual fact. And do you see this
fact as actual, not as a theory?
So, is it possible - I am not saying it is, or it is not, we are going
to find out for ourselves - is it possible to observe without this
division? And to find that out we hope to come to that perception
in which there is no division through analysis. Right? That is, I
analyse myself as the observer and the thing analysed. Is this

getting a little bit too complex?
First of all, in observing myself, there is the actual fact of this
division. When I observe myself I say, "this is good, this is bad",
"this is right, this is wrong", "this has value, this has no value",
"this has relevance and that has not". So when I look at myself, the
observer is conditioned by the culture in which he has lived, so the
observer is the memory, is the entity that is conditioned, the
observer is the 'me'. And according to that background of the 'me'
he judges, he evaluates; if I am a Communist, Hindu, Buddhist and
all the rest of it, I observe myself according to my conditioning and
hope to bring about a change in the observed according to my
conditioning. That is a fact. That is what we are doing all the time,
hoping to change what is observed through analysis, through
control, through reformation and so on. Again that is a fact.
Then I want to find out why this division exists. And I begin to
analyse to find out the cause. After all, all analysis is not only to
find the cause but also to go beyond. Right? I am angry or greedy,
envious, brutal, or whatever it is, violent, neurotic, and I begin to
analyse the cause of this violence, the cause of this neurotic state
and so on and so on and so on. Now in analysis what is involved?
Please follow this. This is part of our culture, because we are
trained from childhood to analyse, thinking that is going to solve
all our problems; volumes are written on it, all the psychologists,
all that business, is to find the cause, to understand the cause and
go beyond. Now analysis implies, doesn't it, time? I need a great
deal of time to analyse myself. Right? I must analyse, examine,
very carefully every reaction, every incident, every thought, trace it
to the cause and all that takes time. Right? And in the mean time

other incidents are going on, other happenings, other reactions,
which I am incapable of quickly understanding. Right? That is one
point, it takes time.
And analysis implies also that everything that is analysed must
be complete, otherwise if it is not analysed properly, the
examination is incorrect, and with that thing which is not correct I
am going to examine the next experience, next incident. So I am all
the time examining with incorrect ideas, values and so increasing
the knowledge of incorrection. I don't know if I am conveying it
rightly. I may be using the wrong words, but we will correct the
words. And analysis implies also the analyser and the analysed,
whether the analyser is the professor, the analyst, the psychologist,
or you yourself, or your friend. The analyser examining and
sustaining the division, nourishing the division, and therefore
increasing conflict. All these things, and more, are implied in
analysis - time, evaluation of every experience, every thought,
completely, which is not possible, and the division created by the
observer and therefore increase in conflict. One sees that, not only
intellectually, but actually, it is so.
And the other question is: I can examine my mind, the
superficial daily activity of the mind, but how am I to understand,
examine the deeper layers - you understand? Are you following all
this? Is it fun? Because I want to understand myself completely,
right through, I don't want to leave a single corner, a dark spot
unexamined. I want everything in me exposed so that there isn't a
single thing which the mind hasn't completely understood. Because
if there is a corner which has not been examined then that corner
distorts all thought, all action. And analysis also implies the

postponement of action. Right? Because when I am analysing
myself I am not acting, I am waiting until my analysis is over, then
perhaps I will act rightly: which means inaction. So analysis is the
denial of action. You are following all this? See what is involved:
time, understanding everything completely in each analysis, which
is not possible; then the division between the analyser and the
analysed and therefore conflict; and analysis is the total denial of
action - action means now, not tomorrow. Seeing all this, can the
mind understand the hidden corners totally?
And, is it possible to understand it through dreams? Because all
this is implied in understanding myself. That is, is it possible
through dreams, and the intimation of the unconscious, or the thing
that is hidden, during sleep. The specialists say that you must
dream. If you do not dream it is an indication of a certain kind of
neurotic state. And it helps you through dreams to understand all
the activities of the hidden mind. There is so much about all this all right, I'll go on. Now what is the meaning of dreams? Should
we dream at all? Or dreams are merely in a symbolic form the
continuation of our daily life? You are following all this? We are
keeping together on our journey? I hope you are ahead of me, that
is all! If you examine closely your own dreams don't you find - not
according to the professionals, the specialists, leave those birds
alone, but examine it for yourself - during the day you are occupied
with all the trivialities of life - cooking, office, you know all the
rest of it, the quarrels, the irritations that go on in daily existence
and relationship, image fighting image. And as you go to sleep, just
before you go to sleep you are taking stock of everything that has
happened during the day. Haven't you ever done it? No? Oh lord!

Doesn't this happen to you that just before you go off to sleep, or
lie down, you go over the day - that you should have done this, you
should have said that, I wish you had put it differently, you got
angry, jealous, you know, you go over the whole period of the day,
your thoughts, your activities, now why does the mind do that?
Please follow this carefully. Why does the mind do it - taking stock
of the day's happenings and events? Doesn't the mind do it because
it wants to establish order? Right? You are following this? Doesn't
it? Don't you think so? Don't agree with me, because I am not
interested. The mind goes over the day because it wants to bring
everything in order, otherwise when you sleep the brain works and
tries to bring order in itself. Right? Because the brain can function
only normally, healthily, in complete order. Right?
So, if there is not order during the day, it tries to establish order
while the body is asleep, is quiet, and the establishment of that
order is part of the dream. You are following all this? Do you
accept all this, what the speaker is saying, I hope not!
Audience: No.
K: No. I am delighted. Don't agree or disagree. Find out. Find
out for yourself, not according to some philosopher, analyst,
psychologist but for yourself find out that a disordered day, a
disordered life, must establish order and then only the brain can
function healthily, efficiently, normally. And when there is
disorder, dreams are necessary to bring about order, whether that
order is deep down or superficial. So one asks, examining all this:
is it necessary to dream at all? Because it is very important not to
dream, to have a mind that is completely quiet when you are
asleep, then the whole brain, the whole mind, the whole body can

rejuvenate itself. But if it is working, working, working while you
are asleep it gets exhausted, and it becomes neurotic, overstrained
and all the rest of it.
So: is it possible not to dream at all? Please I am asking all
these questions because I want to understand myself. It is part of
understanding myself, not merely investigating dreams, or seeing
the importance or non-importance of dreams, but as there is the
fact that unless there is an understanding of oneself completely, all
action becomes contradictory, superficial and creating more and
more and more problems. In understanding myself the old tradition
says: analyse, introspect. And I see the falseness of it. I reject it
because it is false, though all the psychologists say the opposite, or
some of them do. And in observing oneself one says: why does one
dream at all? Is it possible to have a mind that is completely quiet
when it is asleep? You are asking this question, I am not. I am only
suggesting it to you. I have to find out. Now how am I going to
find out? That is: how am I going to find out because I realize that
when the mechanism is still, is quiet, it is capable of gathering
more energy and therefore functioning more efficiently. Right?
That is sirs, look: if the body has no rest, is going on being driven
from morning until night it soon wears out, it breaks down. So if
the body can rest, ten minutes, twenty minutes a day, you know
break it up during the day, it has more energy. In the same way,
during the day the mind is extraordinary active, watching,
observing, looking, criticizing, judging, and being jealous, envious,
you know, struggling, fighting, ambitious - all the rest of it. And
when it goes to sleep the same momentum is kept going. So I am
asking myself whether the mind during sleep can be absolutely

quiet. Just see the beauty of the question, not the answer yet.
Because unless the body is extraordinarily quiet, without gesturing,
nervous twitching, you know all the things that one does,
absolutely quiet, relaxed, not forced to be quiet, then it recuperates,
then it gathers energy. So I want to find out whether the mind can
be absolutely quiet during the night when it is asleep. And I see it
can only be quiet if every incident, happening during the day time
is understood instantly, not carried over. You are following all
this? If I carry over a problem from today to the next day the mind
is at it. But if the mind can solve the problem immediately, today,
it is finished. It may meet another problem and finish it. So is it
possible for the mind to be so totally aware each day that problems
don't exist, by the evening you have a clear, clean slate? You are
following all this? Then you will find, if you do this, not just play
with it, actually work at it, then you will find the brain, because it
needs rest, becomes very quiet - even ten minutes quiet is enough.
And if you pursue that very, very deeply, dreams become totally
unnecessary, because there is nothing to dream about. You are not
concerned with your future. Please follow this. With your future,
because whether you are going to be a great doctor, or a great
scientist, or a marvellous beautiful writer, or going to achieve
enlightenment the day after tomorrow, we are not concerned with
the future at all. You don't see the beauty of it. Therefore the mind
is no longer projecting anything in time.
Now having stated all that, can I, can the mind, which is really
the observer, not only the visual observer, the eyes and so on, but
can the mind observe without division? You understand now? Are
you following? Without division? That is, the observer and the

observed. Because there is only the observed, not the observer. I
wonder if you see all this?
Now let us examine what the observer is - if you have the
energy to go on with this. What is the observer? Surely the
observer is the past - the past, be it yesterday or a few seconds ago,
or the past of many, many, many years, many years as a cultured
conditioned entity, living in a particular culture. Right? The
observer is the past. The observer is the total sum of past
experiences. The observer is knowledge - isn't it? When I say, "I
know you because I met you yesterday", when I say, "I am a
Hindu, Catholic, Protestant, Communist, Muslim" - it is the past, I
have been conditioned in the culture in which I have been brought
up. So the observer is the past. Right? This is obvious, isn't it? Do
you dispute this fact? The observer is within the field of time - to
make it a little more complex. The observer is the past, which
through the present modified the future. And the future is still the
observer. No? When he says, "I will be that", he has projected 'that'
from the past knowledge, either pleasure, pain, suffering or delight,
fear and so on, and says, "I must become that". That is, the past
going through the present which becomes modified, the future,
which is a projection of the past. Right? So the observer is the past.
That is, you live in the past - don't you? Just think of it. You are the
past and you live in the past. And that is your life. Right? Past
memories, past delights, past remembrances, the things that you
enjoyed - and the failures, the lack of fulfilment, the misery,
everything is in the past. And through the eyes of the observer you
begin to judge the present, the thing that is living, moving. Right?
Are we going together?

So, when I look at myself I am looking with the eyes of the
past, and therefore I condemn, judge, evaluate, and say, "this is
right, wrong, good, bad" according to the culture, the tradition, the
knowledge, the experience which the observer has gathered.
Therefore it prevents the observation of the living thing, which is
the 'me'. And that 'me' may not be me at all. I only know the 'me' as
the past. I don't know if you are following this? When the Muslim
says he is a Muslim, he is the past, conditioned by the culture in
which he has been brought up. Or the Catholic, Communist. You
follow? The whole thing is based on this. So when we talk about
living we are talking about living in the past. And therefore there is
conflict between the past and the present, because I am conditioned
as a Muslim, or god knows what, and I cannot meet the living
present, which demands that I break down my conditioning. And
my conditioning is deliberately brought about by my father,
grandfathers, you know, keep me in the narrow line of their belief,
of their tradition, of their mischief, of their misery. Right? This is
what we are doing all the time, not only the conditioning by the
past, the culture in which we have lived, but also by every incident,
experience, happening, we live in the past. I see a beautiful sunset
and I say, "How marvellous that is, look at the light, the shadows,
the rays of the sun, the green light, the hills" - and it has been
stored up and that memory acts tomorrow, says, "I must look at
that sun again, find out that beauty". And therefore I can't find it,
struggle to find it - go to a museum - you follow? The whole circus
begins.
Now can I look at myself with the eyes that have never been
touched by time? Time involves analysis, time involves holding on

to the past, time involves this whole process of dreaming,
recollection, gathering the past and holding it - all that. Can I look
at myself without the eyes of time? Put that question to yourself.
Don't say you can, or you cannot. You don't know. And when you
look at yourself without the eyes of time, what is there then to
look? Don't answer me please. Do you understand my question? I
have looked at myself with the quality, the nature and the structure
of time, the past. I have looked at myself through the eyes of the
past. I have no other eyes to look with. I have looked at myself as a
Catholic, or something else, which is the past. So my eyes are
incapable of looking at itself, at 'what is', without time, which is the
past. Right? Now I am asking a question, which is: can the eyes
observe without the past?
Now let me put it differently: I have an image about myself, not
only created by the culture in which I have lived but also I have my
own particular image of myself, apart from the culture, haven't we?
We have a great many images. I have an image about you, I have
an image about my wife, my children, my political leader, my
priest, and I have an image about what I should be, what I am not,
and I have an image which culture has imposed on me. So I have
quantities of images. Don't you have them? No?
Audience: Yes.
K: Delighted! Now how can you look without an image?
Because if you look with an image it is a distortion - obviously.
Isn't it? If I look at you with the image which I have of you, which
has been put together because you were angry with me yesterday.
You were angry with me yesterday and that has created an image
about you. Right? That you are not my friend anymore, you are

ugly, you are this or that. Now that image distorts the perception
when I meet you next time. Right? So that image is the past, and all
my images are the past. And I daren't get rid of any of those images
because I don't know what it would be without an image. So I cling
to one or two images. So the mind depends on an image for its
survival. I wonder if you are following all this? So can the mind
observe without any image - without the image of the tree, the
cloud, the hills, the flowing waters, the image of my wife, my
children, my husband, my aunt, not to have any image in
relationship. It is the image that brings conflict in relationship.
Right? I cannot get on with my wife because she has bullied me.
That has been built up day after day, that image, that image
prevents any kind of relationship; perhaps we sleep together, that is
irrelevant. And there is a fight. So, can the mind look, observe
without any image of time, any image that has been put together by
time? That means can the mind observe without any image? Which
means to observe without the observer, which is the past, which is
the 'me'? Can I look at you without the 'me' as the conditioned
entity? You are following all this?
Q: It's impossible.
K: Impossible? How do you know it is impossible? The
moment you say it is not possible then you have blocked yourself.
And if you say it is possible, it is also blocking yourself. But if you
say, let's find out, let's examine, let's go into it, then you will find
the mind can observe without the eyes of time. And when it so
observes then what is there to be observed? I started out learning
about myself - I have explored all the possibilities, analysis, all
that, and I see the observer is the past. This is much more complex,

the observer - one can go more into it, but this is enough. I see the
observer is the past, and the mind lives in the past, because the
brain is evolved in time, which is the past. And in the past there is
security. Right? My house, my wife, my belief, my status, my
position, my fame, my blasted little self - in that there is great
safety, security. And I am asking, can the mind observe without
any of that? And if it observes what is there to see, except the hills,
the flowers, the colours, the people - you follow? Is there anything
in me to be observed? Therefore the mind is totally free. And you
say, what is the point of that being free? The point is: such a mind
has no conflict. And such a mind is completely quiet and peaceful,
not violent. And such a mind can create a new culture - a new
culture, not a counter culture of the old, but a totally different thing
altogether, where we shall have no conflict at all. That one has
discovered, not as a theory, as a verbal statement, but as an actual
fact within oneself that the mind can observe totally and therefore
without the eyes of the past and therefore the mind is something
totally different.
Now would you like to discuss this question which we have
talked about?
Q: I think we all see the danger of these images. But at certain
times some images are necessary - if somebody runs against you
with a knife this image will help you because it will save your life.
So how can we choose between these useful and useless images?
K: The questioner says we all live with images. Some are useful
maybe necessary, protective, others are not. The image of a tiger,
when you are in the woods, is rather protective. And the image you
have about your friend, wife, children, or whatever it is, that

destroys relationship. Now how is one to choose between the two?
Which are necessary images to keep, and which are not necessary
to keep? You have got it? You have understood the question? What
are the images I should keep, and what are the images I should
discard? The images, the questioner says, some of them are selfprotective, protect one, others are destructive. Now how am I to
choose? Right? I don't know. We shall find out.
First of all, why do you choose at all? Listen to my question
please. Why do we choose? What is the structure, nature of choice?
I choose only when I am uncertain. Right? When there is
confusion, when the there is uncertainty, when there is no clarity.
Then I say, "I don't know what to do, perhaps I will do this".
Right? When you see something very clearly there is no choice.
Right? It is only the confused mind that chooses. And we have
made choice the most extraordinary important thing in life. We call
that freedom, to choose - choose your politicians - you follow - to
choose this or that. And I say to myself, why do I choose at all? I
am coming to the question, sir, go into this carefully with me. Why
do I choose at all? I choose between two stuffs, two materials, but
that is not what we are talking about. We are talking about choice
which is the outcome of uncertainty, not clarity, confusion, then I
have to choose, which indicates a mind that is very clear has no
choice. Right? Now isn't your mind confused? I am coming to the
question sir. Go into it step by step. Is your mind confused?
Obviously it is, otherwise you wouldn't all be sitting here. And out
of that confusion you choose and therefore increase the confusion.
So you say, I have so many images, some are protective, others
are not necessary. Is there any choice there? Listen carefully. Is

choice necessary there at all? You understand my question? I have
many, many, many images about everything, opinions, judgements,
evaluations, the more I have opinions the greater I think my mind
is clear. And images I have galore. And I say which of these
images is important, relevant, and which are not? Now why do I
have to choose? Choice arises only when I am uncertain which
images I have to keep, which images I have to discard. You are
following all this? Follow it, carefully follow this. I choose when I
do not know which images I have to get rid of. Now who is the
entity that is choosing? Surely knowledge. Knowledge is the past.
Follow this. The past that has created the images, dozens of them,
chooses which it shall keep and which it shall discard. So you are
choosing according to the past, and therefore your choice
invariably must be confused. Therefore don't choose! Wait! Wait!
See it. See it. Don't choose. Then what happens if you don't
choose? You won't be run over by the bus obviously. It is the very
choice that sustains the images. I don't know if you see this?
Yes sir?
Q: You mentioned that we are all confused otherwise we
wouldn't be here.
K: That's it partly sir. Carry on.
Q: How, if I am confused, how can I possibly listen to you
without evaluating everything you are saying?
K: That's just it, sir. That's what we are afraid of. The questioner
says, if I am confused, which I am, how can I listen to you clearly right? But you are not listening! Are you?
Q: Sometimes.
K: Wait. Wait. Sometimes. We are not talking about sometimes,

we are saying: are you listening now? When you are listening with
attention, you know, with affection, with care, you know, when
you are listening, are you confused? It is only when you are not
listening and you want to listen, then confusion arises. But at the
moment of listening - you know - where is the confusion? And
remembering that moment when you have listened so completely,
then you say to yourself, "I wish to goodness I could get back to
that". Wait! Then you have conflict. Right? Then you say, "How
am I to get back to that state of listening?" See what has happened.
The memory of that state of listening remains and the actual fact
has gone, so your memory then says, "I must listen more
carefully". So there is contradiction. Whereas if you listen
completely, at that moment of listening entirely wholly, there is no
confusion. That moment is enough. Don't try to get back to it. Pick
it up again ten minutes later. But be aware during those ten minutes
that you have been inattentive. Right? Do you get all this?
Yes Sir?
Q: This culture that is emerging from the still mind, will it be
peaceful?
K: I don't know, sir. That is supposition. The gentleman asks the
question: if the mind of all of us is peaceful then we will have a
new culture which will be a culture of complete peace. You see
how our minds work.
Q: I haven't finished it.
K: Oh, I beg your pardon.
Q: Well, if..
K: Not if!
Q: Will people be in conflict with the present day structure of

society?
K: Will people be in conflict with the present structure of
society? If I am peaceful would I be in conflict with the structure
of society? And what do I mean by "conflict with the structure"?
Go on, investigate sir, don't wait for me to do it.
Q: Will there be competition?
K: Competition. I want to establish myself, my ideas, my - you
follow? That is exactly what they are doing. No?
Q: Sir, if somebody says, 'Take this gun and shoot' - then you
say, 'No', you are in conflict.
K: If somebody asks me to take a gun and shoot somebody else
- I won't. What is the question?
Q: If you say, "I won't" you are in conflict.
K: Certainly not. They will put me in prison? All right. But I am
not in conflict with them. If the drug culture says you must take
drugs and I say, 'I am sorry I don't want to take drugs' - are they in
conflict, or am I in conflict? I am not. They are! What is the point
of all this?
Q: There are two sides to conflict.
K: No. There are no two sides. I don't want to have conflict. I,
as a human being, I have investigated into this whole question of
conflict, outwardly and inwardly, and I have gone into it pretty
thoroughly and I say - suppose, if I have eliminated completely all
sense of violence in me - if you are in conflict what am I to do? If
you beat me, if you ask me to take a gun and shoot somebody, if
you get violent, it is your problem, not my problem.
Q: Sir, if the man who asks you to shoot somebody else, you
can say: he is in conflict with me, I am not in conflict with him.

K: But I am not in conflict with him, why should I shoot him?
Wait, wait! Is somebody offering me a gun here, now? You are not
offering me a gun, are you? To shoot somebody? Why does the
problem arise? You see the problem arises because we are now
beginning to speculate. What will you do if you are peaceful. Find
out how to live peacefully first, and then that question will be
answered later.
Q: Does conflict come from imagination?
K: When two people quarrel, does it come from imagination?
Look! Look at it. I am attached to you. Attached, depend on you.
Right? Depend emotionally, psychologically, physically, sexually,
economically, I depend on you. And one beautiful morning you
say, "Go" to me. "I like somebody else". Then conflict arises.
Right? Is that imagination? It is a fact because I am dependent on
you for companionship and so on and so on. And when you turn
against me I am lost. That is not imagination. That is an actual fact.
Then I begin to find out why I am dependent on you. I want to find
out. That is again I want to find out because it is part of selfknowledge, you understand, why I am dependent on you at all.
Wait! Aren't you all dependent on somebody? Psychologically,
inwardly? Can you stand completely alone? Sir, inwardly? You
can't stand alone because you need the milkman, the postman, the
railway, etc., etc., but inwardly completely alone, not be
dependent.
So I have to find out why I am dependent. Why? First of all, I
am lonely. I don't know how to go beyond this loneliness. I am
frightened of it. Deep down I have no answer how to resolve this
terrible thing called loneliness. Don't you know all this? So, not

knowing how to resolve it I attach myself to people, to ideas, to
groups, to activities, you know, to demonstrations, to climbing the
mountains and all the rest of it. If I could resolve this problem of
loneliness totally so that the idea doesn't exist at all. Now how am I
to be beyond this terrible thing of which man has fought inwardly
at all times, because being lonely, insufficient, incomplete, he says,
there is god, there is this, there is that, projects an outside agency.
Then how am I to be free of this loneliness? Do you want to go
into it? Aren't you tired, it is a quarter to twelve.
We had better stop. I think this is too complex a problem. That
is, how the mind can free itself from this terrible burden of what it
calls loneliness. Have you ever realized what we do out of this
loneliness? What horrors we commit?

SAANEN 4TH PUBLIC TALK 24TH JULY 1971.
May we go on talking over together where we left off the other
day? We were talking together about order. I think we went into it
pretty thoroughly. And then we went into the question of order
within ourselves, not only outwardly but also inwardly. There can
be no order inwardly, and outwardly naturally, if there is no selfknowing. And we went into that the last time that we met here. We
were talking about loneliness, and I think it is important to
understand the whole business of it. I think most of us realize that
we are, when we dare face it, terribly lonely, isolated human
beings. And if we are consciously, or unconsciously, aware of it,
we want to escape from it because we don't know what is behind it,
what lies through it and beyond it. And being frightened we run
away from it through attachment, through activity, through every
form of religious or worldly entertainment. I think this is fairly
obvious when one observes this in oneself. We, by our very
everyday activity, by our attitudes and way of thinking, we isolate
ourselves, though we may have intimate relationship we are always
working, thinking about ourselves. And the result of it is - if you
can examine it, as we shall presently - much more isolation,
loneliness, greater dependency on outward things, greater
attachment and the subsequent suffering from it. I do not know if
you are aware of all this at all. And perhaps this morning, as we are
sitting here for an hour or more, we could become aware, if you
will, of this thing called loneliness, isolation in our relationships,
attachments, dependency and suffering. This is what is going on all
the time, if one is observant, in ourselves endlessly.

Our activity is self-centred. We are thinking about ourselves
endlessly, how healthy we are, or unhealthy, that we must
meditate, sit rightly, that we must make progress, we must change,
we must have a better job, more money, better relationship - me
and my - you follow? The eternal circle, a vicious circle that is
going on all the time. Me sitting next to god - on the right hand
side of course! And me attaining enlightenment. I must achieve in
this life something or other. We are always concerned and devoted
to ourselves. And again that is an obvious daily fact. And from that
concern our activities, whether we go to the office, factory,
whatever activity we do, social, concerned with the welfare of the
world - it is always me and the world. This self-concern does
produce through its daily occupation, daily travail, daily
relationship, an isolating process. I think this again is fairly
obvious. And this isolation ends up, if one goes into it pretty
deeply and thoroughly, into an awareness of loneliness, being
completely alone, isolated, not having any relationship with
anything, though you may be in a crowd, or sitting next to your
friend, suddenly it comes upon you this sense of isolation, this
sense of completely being cut off from all relationship. I do not
know if you have not noticed it. Have you? Or is this something of
which you have no knowledge of?
If you are aware of it, and becoming aware of it knowing it, it is
there, we try to escape from it, don't we - occupation, nagging,
thinking about meditation as an escape. All this, doesn't it,
indicates that the mind, whatever it is, shallow, or deep, or
superficial, or merely caught in technological knowledge, the mind
being occupied with itself all the time must cut itself off from

every form of relationship. And relationship is the most important
thing in life, because if we have not right relationship with one please listen to this - if we have not right relationship with the one,
you cannot possibly have right relationship with any other human
being. You can imagine you'll have better relationship with
another, but it is just a verbal imaginative relationship. But if you
understand what relationship is, relationship between two human
beings and therefore with the rest of the world, then isolation,
loneliness with all its suffering, has quite a different meaning.
So what is relationship? We are going back after establishing
what is relationship, to try to find out why human beings are so
desperately lonely, wanting to be loved, not having love, cutting
themselves off, both physically, psychologically, and thereby
becoming neurotic. Don't you know so many people that are so
extraordinarily neurotic? Including ourselves of course, not others!
Slightly unbalanced, fixed on some particular idiosyncracy. All this
arises, it seems to me, if you examine it closely and go into it, from
the utter lack of right relationship.
So before we begin to understand how to bring an end to this
loneliness, to this suffering, to this ache and anxiety of human
existence, one must go into this question of relationship. What it
means to be related. Are we related at all with another? Or we
think we are, thought asserts that we are related but actually you
may not be related because unless - again it appears - unless we
find that a human being can live with another, intimately or not,
sexually or not, unless one finds deeply the truth of relationship, it
appears human beings must inevitably end in sorrow, in confusion
and in conflict, whether they go to church, whether they believe in

god, whether they do social work or whether they accept various
forms of belief and all the rest of it, that has utterly no value at all
unless human beings have established between themselves a
relationship in which there is no conflict whatsoever. And is that
possible? Can you and I, perhaps you could have a very good
relationship with me, because I am going next week or the week
after, and it's finished. But whether you have a right relationship perhaps we shouldn't use the word 'right' - a relationship at all with
another, and what does this relationship mean? Can there be a
relationship between two human beings if each one is occupied
with himself, if each one is concerned with his own ambitions,
worries, anxieties, his position in the world, his fame - you know
all the rest of that absurdity that human beings go through? When a
human being is caught in that net can he have any relationship at
all with another?
Please examine it and let's go into it because we are sharing this
thing together, we are not just listening to a morning sermon. You
know talking of sermons, one day a teacher who had been giving
sermons for many years before a small and elect audience, one day
as he got onto the platform, he saw a little bird come and sit on the
window sill, and it began to sing; and it sang for several minutes.
At the end of it, it flew away, and the teacher said, "This morning's
sermon is over". I wish we could do the same here now! That
would be lovely, wouldn't it? At least it would be for me.
So what is relationship? Can there be a relationship when each
human being has a problem, however trivial, however complex,
can there be a relationship when each one is pursuing his own
particular aggrandizement? Can there be a relationship when each

one pursues his own particular little tendency? Can there be a
relationship when there is ambition, greed, envy, when each one
has a belief - please follow all this - a belief to which he clings?
Can there be any relationship between a man and a woman when
one is a Catholic and the other is a Protestant, or a Hindu or a
Buddhist, practising not just casually? So what is relationship?
Because it seems to me that it is one of the most important things
in life, because living is relationship. If there is no right
relationship there is no living at all, it is then merely a series of
conflicts, either ending up in divorce, or just separation, or
isolation with all its anxieties, attachments, fears and all the things
that are involved in this sense of being completely isolated. I am
sure you know all this. The older one grows, not merely in age but
in observation one realizes - I must be careful here, observation is
not a matter of time, I must withdraw that. One observes in life
how extraordinarily vital relationship is. And apparently very few
human beings have broken down the barrier that exists between
themselves and another. And to break down this barrier, with all
the implications in it, not just the physical barrier, one has to go
deeply into this question of action. Right? Are we following each
other?
What is action? Action is not the future action, or the past
action, but action - the acting. Is it the result of a conclusion and
acting according to that conclusion? Or is it based on some belief
and acting according to that belief? Is it based on some experience
and acting according to that experience or knowledge? And if it is,
then action is always in the past. No? And so our relationship is
always in the past, not the present. Are we meeting each other?

Look: if I have a relationship with another, in that relationship and relationship is action, obviously - in that relationship I have
built up through many days, years, or a week, an image about her,
or him. And according to that image I have I act. And she acts
according to that image which she has. And this image is the
relationship between her and me, or him and you. Right? Are you
following all this? Please do observe your own minds, your own
activity in relationship and you will soon find out the truth and
validity of this statement. Our relationship is based on image.
Right? And how can there be a relationship with another if it is
merely a relationship of images? You understand? No? All right I'll
go on. Tant pis! If you don't understand then you don't understand
it. It's up to you.
Because I am concerned in life in having right relationship, in a
relationship in which there is no conflict whatsoever, and a
relationship in which I am not using another, and not exploiting
another, either sexually, for reasons of pleasure, or companionship.
And I see to have such a relationship in which there is absolutely
no conflict, because to have a conflict destroys any form of
relationship, because I must resolve that conflict at the very centre,
not at the periphery. And I can only put an end to that conflict by
understanding action, not only in relationship but in daily life. I
want to find out whether my activity is isolating, building a wall
round myself, the wall being myself concerned with myself, with
my future, with my happiness, with my health, with my god, with
my belief, with my success, with my misery - you follow? Or my
relationship has nothing whatsoever to do with myself? You are
following? Myself being the centre, and acting according to me, to

my satisfaction, to my glory, to my happiness, it must isolate. And
where there is isolation there must be attachment, dependency.
And when there is a doubt in that attachment and dependency, then
there is suffering, and suffering implies isolation in any
relationship. I see that very clearly, which is not verbal, or
intellectual, but actual - an actual fact.
So how am I, who have built for many years images about
myself, and images about another, having isolated myself through
action, through belief and so on, how am I to be free of these
images? That is my first question. Images of my god, my religion,
my conditioning, the images that I must achieve fame, or achieve
enlightenment, which is the same thing, achieve success and
therefore frightened of being a failure. You are following all this?
So I have many, many images about myself and about you, now
how am I to be free of them? Does it lie through analysis? We went
into it the other day. Does the ending of images, the building up of
images, does it come to an end through the analytical process?
Obviously not, which we went into the other day, and I'm not going
back into it. Then what am I to do? It is a problem - you understand
- it is a problem and I must end that problem, not take it over the
next day. I went into that too. Because if I do not end my problem
today, the problem creates disorder, disturbance, and a brain needs
order to function healthily and normally, non-neurotically. I must
establish order now, during the day, otherwise the mind worries
about it, has dreams and all the rest of it, and is incapable of being
fresh the next morning. We went into that again some time ago. So
I must end this problem of building and preventing images. Right?
Now how is this to be done? By not creating a super-image,

obviously. Right? I have many images - suppose I have, I haven't
got any, thank god - suppose I have many images, the tendency is,
not being able to solve them, to be free of these images, the mind
creates a super-image - the higher self, the Atman, the various
forms of outside agencies, whether the outside agencies be spiritual
or the elder brother of the Communist world, or the religious
world; without creating a higher image, there must be the ending of
all the images which I have collected. Now how is this to be done?
I hope you are interested in this. Because if I have any single image
there is no possibility of having good relationship; because images
separate, and where there is separation there must be conflict, not
only nationally but between human beings. That is clear. So how
am I to be free of all the images I have gathered in my life, so that
the mind is completely free and fresh, and young so that it can
observe anew the whole movement of life? Right?
Now first of all I must find out how the images come into being,
non-analytically. Right? That is, I must learn to observe. Now is
observation based on analysis? I observe, I see. Is that the result of
time, of analysis, of practise? Or is it an act outside of time? I give
it up! I'm awfully interested in this because, you see man has tried
to go beyond time by various tricks, and they have always failed.
Man has tried, knowing that perhaps he is not capable of getting rid
of these innumerable images so he has created a super-image, and
to that image he becomes a slave and therefore he is not free,
whether that super-image is the state or anything else, it is still not
freedom, it is another image. Please follow this carefully. And
being vitally concerned with the ending of images, because then
only is there a possibility of having right relationship with another,

my concern then is to find out if I can end all the images instantly not go chasing one image after another, that will lead nowhere,
obviously. So I must find out if it is at all possible to break the
mechanism of the mind which builds images.
So I must go into the question of what it is to be aware - sorry it
makes it a little complicated, but it doesn't matter. Because that
may solve my problem. My problem being the ending of all
images, because that gives freedom, and where there is freedom
then only there is a possibility of having right relationship, a true
relationship, in which every form of conflict has come to an end.
So what does this awareness mean? Awareness implies an
attention in which there is no choice whatsoever. I can't choose one
image over the other. Then there is no ending of that image. So I
must find out what it is to be aware in which there is no choice at
all but only pure observation, pure seeing. Are we going along?
Now what is seeing? How do I look at a tree, or a mountain, the
hills, the moon, the flowing waters, how do I look at it? There is
not only visual observation but also the mind has an image about
the tree, the cloud, the mountain, the river. That river has a name,
that river makes a sound which is pleasant, or unpleasant. I am
always observing, being aware of things, in terms of like and
dislike, in terms of comparison. And is it possible to observe, to
listen to that river without any choice? To listen without any
resistance, without any attachment, without any verbalization? You
do this please as we are talking. It is your morning exercise. Can I
listen to that river without any sense of the past? Can I observe
these various images without any choice, which means without
condemning any one of them, or being attached to any one of them,

without any preference, just to observe? Can you do it? You can't,
can you? Why? Why can't I - please put yourself that question why can't I observe all the images which I have, without any
prejudice, without any preference, why? Why can't I do it? Is it my
mind has become used to prejudices, preferences? Or is it lazy, has
not sufficient energy? Or is it that it doesn't really want to be free
of any image but hold to one particular little image? Which means
the mind refuses to see the truth, the fact that all existence is
relationship, and when there is conflict in that relationship then life
becomes a misery, a confusion, loneliness, you know all the rest of
it follows.
So does the mind see the truth that where there is conflict there
is no relationship - the truth of it, the fact of it? - seeing being nonverbally. Now how do you, how does one be free of the images
that one has? First of all I must find out how these images come
into being, how they happen, what is the mechanism of it. You can
see that when you are not paying attention at the moment of actual
relationship, that is, when you are talking, when there is nagging,
when there is brutality, when there is an insult, at that moment
when you are not completely attentive, then the mechanism of
building an image starts. Right? That is, when the mind is not
completely attentive at the moment of action, then the machinery
of building images starts. Right? That is, when you say something
to me which I don't like, or I like, and if at that moment I am not
completely attentive, then the machinery starts. If I am attentive,
aware, then there is no building of images. Right? Right? Which
means that the moment when the mind is fully awake, not
distracted, not being frightened, or rejecting what is being said, at

that moment when the mind is completely awake, then there is no
possibility of having an image. You try this, do it during the day.
Then what happens to all the images that one has collected? I have
found now how to prevent the building of images, but what
happens to all the images that I have gathered? You are following
the problem? What do you do with them? I hope you are working
as hard as I am doing - are you? I doubt it!
Apparently this is not your problem, because if this were your
real, deep, vital, intense problem of your life, you would have
found the answer, you wouldn't be sitting there waiting for me to
find the answer and then you to copy it. Now what happens to all
the images that you have collected? Do you know you have many
images, hidden away in your cupboard of the mind? And can you
resolve them all bit by bit, one image after the other? And that
would take an infinite time, wouldn't it? While you are dissolving
one image you are already creating another, so there is no ending
to the gradual process of gradually getting rid of one image after
another.
So you have found a truth, which is: that you cannot get rid of
the images bit by bit, one by one; therefore there must be a mind,
because it has seen that it is not possible to get rid of the images
one by one, because it has seen that, the truth of it, then the mind,
when it is aware of creating the one image, in that attention all the
other images go away. I wonder if you see? Have you got it? No.
As we said just now, images are formed when the mind is not
attentive. Please bear that in mind. When the mind is not attentive
then the images are formed. And most of our minds are inattentive,
have no attention. Occasionally you have attention, the rest of the

period you are inattentive. In those periods of inattention images
are built up. And when you are aware of one image attentively and
aware attentively how the machinery operates, then in that
attention all images come to an end, all images, both the past and
the present building of the images. What matters is the state of
attention. Right? Not how many images you have. I wonder if you
see? Please do get this. Do understand this because this is a most
important thing. I'll sit here for five hours until you understand it!
Because if you can really grasp this once you will have understood
the whole machinery of the mind.
You see most of us have not been able to solve our problems.
We don't know how to solve them. And therefore we live with
them, and they become our habit, they become like an armour
through which you cannot penetrate. And when you have a
problem which has not been resolved then you have no energy, the
energy that you have is taken up by the problem. And so you have
no energy. And having no energy you fall into the habit of it. So
you have to find out, if you are at all serious, if you really want to
live a life in which there is no conflict whatsoever, you have to find
out how to end a problem instantly, immediately, a human
problem. Which means give complete attention to that problem,
that is, not seek an answer to the problem - please follow this - not
seek an answer to the problem because if you are seeking an
answer then you are going beyond the problem, whereas if you
remain with the problem completely attentively, then in the
problem itself is the answer, not outside the problem.
Look sirs, let me put it differently. We all know what suffering
is, both physically and psychologically, inwardly. Physically the

pain, one can deal with that by various remedies and not allowing
the memory of that pain to remain. Do you follow? Now if you are
aware of that pain, and in that very awareness you will see the
memory of the past pain disappears. And therefore you have
energy to meet the next pain, if you have it, physical pain.
Psychologically we have all suffered in various degrees, with
greater intensity, or lesser, we have all been through suffering of
one kind or another. When we suffer instinctively we want to run
away from it - church, amusement, god, football, you know,
anything to get away from it, read books - I won't go into all the
absurdities we do. Now if the mind is attentive, and does not move
away from suffering at all, then you will see out of that complete
attention there is not only energy, which means passion, but also
the ending of suffering. In the same way all images can come to an
end instantly when there is no preference for any image. This is
very important: when there is no preference for any image.
Because you have no preference you have no prejudice, then you
are attentive, then you look. In that observation there is not only
the understanding of building up images but also the ending of all
images. If you haven't got it, tant pis, I must go on.
So I see the importance of relationship, and there can be a
relationship without any conflict, which means love. Love is not
image. Love is not pleasure. Love is not desire. Love is not
something to be cultivated, it is not dependent on memory. And
can I live a life, daily life, without any sense of self-concern? The
self-concern is my major image. Right? Can I live without that
major image, and therefore action, which does not bring isolation,
loneliness and suffering? Right.

Now do you want to talk, discuss? Yes sir?
Q: When one looks within and seems to experience a deep
passion to understand, unmotivated, but with a bit of candour you
find that actually this feeling is a wish for the experience of reality
and as a result can the self, which is all we know today, experience
this seemingless essential unmotivated passion and see the
essential difference between those feelings?
K: Will you give me a breather? I'll translate it in a minute. I'll
repeat what the question is. Let's take a rest a bit, shall we, if you
don't mind.
The questioner asks - please correct me it I am not repeating it
rightly - the questioner asks: the self, the me, wants to experience
something real, something beyond the self. The questioner asks:
can the self, the me, experience the real? Right sir? That is one part
of the question, isn't it?
Q: Can we have the unmotivated passion that is necessary to
perceive the truth?
K: Can the self have - I am repeating the question - unmotivated
passion, which alone can bring about the perception of the truth?
Right? Can the self have that intense passion, which is necessary,
that intense passion, energy, vitality, drive, to understand, perceive
that which is not of the self - right?
Now first of all, what is the self? When you say the 'me', when
you say: 'the "me", can I experience the real, the extraordinary
thing', what is that 'me'? What do you think is that 'me'? That 'me'
is the result of your education, that 'me' is the result of your
conflicts, your cultures, your relationship with the rest of the
world, the propaganda which has been shoved down your mind for

two thousand or ten thousand years, that 'me' which is attached to
your furniture, to your wife, to your husband - right - that 'me' that
says, "I want to be happy", "I have achieved" - all that. It is the
'me', isn't it? No? The 'me' that says, "I am a Christian", the 'me'
that says, "I am a Communist" - Muslim, Hindu and all the terrible
divisions. Now can that 'me', which is isolated, which is by its very
structure and nature limited, and therefore creating division, can
that 'me' have any passion at all? It can have passion of pleasure,
which is different from the passion of which we are talking about?
Obviously not. So only with the ending of the 'me' is there passion.
And it is only a mind that is free from all the prejudices, opinions,
judgements, what 'you should' - conditioned - it is only such a mind
that can have passion, intensity, and therefore be able to see that
which is.
Q: Yes.
K: You say, yes. Is that merely a verbal statement, or you really
see the truth of it and therefore you are free?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Of course, sir. That is right. Just a minute sir. I have
understood a little Spanish, now he is going to destroy it!
Q: (Continues in Spanish - inaudible)
K: Have you got it sir?
Q: These images that are within ourselves waste energy.
K: Obviously. Yes sir, that is right. Oh Lord! The question is:
do not these images that one has, one or many, don't they waste
energy? And therefore all the rest of it. What do you say?
Obviously. If I have an image about myself and that is opposite to
your image, there must be conflict, and therefore it must be a

wastage of energy, isn't that so? Don't waste time on this.
Q: Can a person who is free from any problems have
relationship with people who are full of problems?
K: Right. Can a person who is free of all problems, can he have
any relationship with another who is full of problems? Well you
have answered it. Haven't you answered the question? Can he? If
you are free of problems, really not just imaginatively, actually free
of every problem that human beings have - death, love, sorrow,
fear, pleasure - you know, problems - can I have any relationship
with you if I have many of my problems? Obviously not. Then
what do I do? You have no problems - listen to this - and I have
problems, then what do I do? I either throw you out, push you
away, or I begin to worship you. Right? I put you on a pedestal and
say, "By Jove, what an extraordinary man he is. What an
extraordinary man he is, he has no problems". And I have, so I
begin to worship you, I begin to follow you, I begin to listen to
whatever you say, hoping I will resolve my problems by following
you. Which means what? I am going to destroy you with my
problems. Because I threw you out, now I accept you by
worshipping you, which means I will also kill you.
Q: Is there any hope for us?
K: It all depends on you. If you are serious. If you really deeply
are interested in resolving your problems completely, then you
have the intensity and the vitality to resolve them. Not if you play
with them one day and pick it up the next.
Yes, madame?
Q: (In French)
K: Yes. The lady says: we seem to look at everything from a

distance, through a passage, through a narrow vision. Right? That
is it madame?
Q: May I ask a question?
K: Yes sir.
Q: Krishnaji, when you were last in Amsterdam in May, at the
end of the very first talk, there was a boy got up with a problem.
The problem was drugs and you said - I won't put an end to you
taking drugs - and you demonstrated this way......... And the whole
hall of a few thousand people were silent and nobody said a word
after that. One's own question is: is there anything else we can do
to help the youth?
K: The gentleman asks: what can we do to prevent others from
taking drugs? Do you take drugs here?
Q: No.
K: I understand your question sir.
Q: We drink coffee, we drink alcohol.
K: Wait sir. Wait. We drink coffee, we take alcohol, we smoke,
we do all kinds of things, including taking drugs, marijuana, grass,
hashish, opium and heroin - right? Now do you want to go into
this?
Q: Yes.
K: Delighted! Why do you take them? Coffee - please listen to
this - coffee, tea, marijuana, heroin, alcohol - why? Coffee, tea are
stimulants, aren't they? No?
Audience: Yes.
K: I know. I know. I don't take them but I know. Coffee, tea are
stimulants. Physiologically you may need some form of stimulant.
Right? Some people need them. And is alcohol, tobacco the same

as taking drugs? Go on answer it.
Audience: Yes.
K: Wait. Alcohol you say is the same as taking drugs.
Q: No.
Q: Yes.
K: Wait, wait. Don't take sides please. One says, no, and
somebody else says, yes. Then where are we? I am asking: why do
you take any of these things at all? Is it that you need stimulants?
You need to be pushed, encouraged, stimulated? Go on answer.
You were so quick saying, yes, now answer this. Football,
stimulating. Alcohol, stimulating. Tea, tobacco, heroin, all the rest
of it. Why do you need them?
Q: To escape.
K: To escape. Take a glass of wine and you are happy, therefore
it is quickly done!
Q: Yes.
K: Wait, wait. Wait. So you need stimulants in various forms.
Are you being stimulated here by me?
Q: Yes.
K: Wait. (Laughter). Do please pay a little attention. Are you
being stimulated by the speaker? Don't say, no, and this gentleman
says, yes. Please. Investigate it please. Are you being stimulated? If
you are then the speaker is as good as a drug. Then you depend on
the speaker, as you depend on the drug or coffee, tea, marijuana
and all the rest of it. I am asking why you depend, not whether it is
right or wrong, or should, should not. Why do you depend on any
of these stimulants?
Q: We don't answer in defence. We can see it has such and such

action on us, but we don't need to be dependent.
K: He says, we can see its action but we need not be dependent.
But you are dependent when that stimulation wears out and you
need more stimulant, which means you are dependent. I may take
LSD one morning and get a kick out of it, take a trip or whatever it
is, and it let's me down and I have to pick it up again the day after
tomorrow. So I depend on it. Now I am asking why the human
mind depends - listen to this please - depends on sex, on drugs, on
alcohol, or on any form of stimulation outwardly. This is all
psychological - right? Coffee, tea may be physiological because we
eat wrongly, we live wrongly, we overindulge and so on and so on,
we need certain forms of stimulation. But why do we want to be
stimulated in any other way, psychologically? Is it because in
ourselves we are so poor? Yes? Is that it? Because we have not the
brains, the capacity to be something entirely different, and not
depend on all this? Then if you are dependent, alcohol, coffee, tea,
drugs - drugs are much more serious than alcohol, or tea, or coffee,
because drugs, from what I have been told by doctors who have
gone into this pretty thoroughly, that it destroys the brain cells.
Q: Doesn't alcohol?
K: Wait. It destroys brain cells, alcohol may do it gradually,
take a number of years, but the drugs are very, very serious
because it affects your future generation, your children. So if you
say, "Well I don't mind what happens to my grandson, I want to
indulge in drugs" - that is the end of the argument. But I am saying,
what happens to your mind when you depend on something,
whether it be coffee, tea, sex, anything you like, waving a flag?
Q: I loose my freedom.

K: You not only - you see you say these things but you don't
live it. Do you? Does it destroy freedom? Doesn't it, when you
depend on something, doesn't it make you a slave to alcohol, you
must have your drink, you martini, whatever you take. So
gradually your mind becomes dull through dependency. And
therefore it has been established, long ago, in India, that any
religious man who is really religious will never touch any of this.
But sir, you don't care. You say, "I need stimulation". You know I
met a man once who took a lot of drugs, LSD and he said I go to
the museum after taking LSD and I see colours more brightly,
everything stands out more sharply, there is beauty. But his mind
becomes gradually destroyed, he may see the lovely light of a
sunset, but his mind is going, gone, finished, after a year or two he
is just a thoughtless entity. Now if you like all that kind of stuff, go
to it. But if you don't like it, put it completely away from you. I
think that is enough, don't you?

SAANEN 5TH PUBLIC TALK 27TH JULY 1971.
I hope you are prepared this morning to go into something that
requires a great deal of consideration, and not only verbal,
intellectual, penetration, but also non-verbal. I don't know quite
where to begin because I want personally to go into something that
seems to me to have a great deal of interest and importance, and
needs very clear thinking sanely, rationally, objectively. And I
hope you are prepared for that. I don't know what is going to be the
outcome of it, but we'll try.
Most of us feel that the world is so chaotic - if you allowed a
madman to organize the world he couldn't do better than what it is
now. And many feel that there must be environmental change political, economic, polluting the air, stopping wars, a great deal of
poverty and at the same time enormous wealth, maldistribution and
so on. Most of us consider that these must be changed first change the environmental, peripheral transformation and then man
will be capable of dealing with himself much more reasonably,
wisely. But I think the problem is much more deep, much more
complex than merely the change in the outward circumstances. I
think most mature and educated minds - I mean by that word
'educated' not in the ordinary sense of the word but a mind that has
observed the events in the world, the permissive action of the
young people and the desperate hypocrisy of the older generation any so-called educated and mature mind is aware that the problem
is much more profound, more complex, needs altogether a different
approach to that which you are accustomed.
I don't quite know where to begin. I think that is a fact. And one

observes also that all this human endeavour, outwardly as well as
inwardly - going to the moon, and the transformation of oneself,
one's mind and one's heart - we think it can all be done by thought.
We have given tremendous importance to the functioning of
thought - logically, objectively, or irrationally, or neurotically.
Thought throughout the ages, as one observes, has played an
extraordinary important role. Thought is measure and this
measurement by thought to bring about order and change is very
limited, and apparently has not succeeded - superficially it has but
not fundamentally. Thought, the whole machinery of thinking, has
played a role that has brought about the present condition of this
world, and I think there is no denying of that. And we think
thought can change, not only the outward events and happenings,
and pollution and all the rest of it, but also one thinks that by the
careful usage of thought one can transform the human
conditioning, the human way of action, way of living. And again
that is fairly obvious: that thought is necessary in bringing about
order in the world. That is, organized thought, carefully worked
out, objectively, healthily, we think can change the environment;
and the environment with its pollution, poverty and all the rest of it
needs vast changes. I think again that is very clear. And the whole
technological world in which we live is based on thought with its
measurement. And thought can only function when there is space.
Thought creates its own space - space being time, the distance from
here to there, the measurement. And on that the whole modern
world is built. Right?
Can I go on? And measurement, which is the very nature of
thinking, with its space, is obviously very, very limited, because

thought is conditioned. Thought is the response of total memory,
which is the past; the response to the past when it is challenged is
thought. All right? Are you coming with me? I am not going off by
myself, am I?
And thought apparently has not put an end to war. On the
contrary thought has bred wars, division, both religious, economic,
social and so on. Thought in itself is the cause of fragmentation.
And what is the function of thought - thought being the response of
knowledge, and knowledge is always in the past? Out of that
knowledge thought can project the future, modifying through the
activities of the present. Right? And thought can project, because
of its knowledge, a future of what the world should be. But
apparently what the world should be never takes place. Every
philosopher, so-called religious teachers, have projected a world in
the future, based upon our knowledge of the past, and projecting
something out of the past which will be the opposite or modified
response of the past, and so thought has never brought man
together. Again that is a fact.
On the contrary thought desiring to function in knowledge, and
it can only function in knowledge, and knowledge being
measurable, thought can never bring about true relationship
between man and man. Right? So I am asking myself: what is the
function of knowledge, which is the known, which is the past, what
is the function of the response to that past, which is thought, in
daily life? Right? Do you put this question ever?
One lives by thought, one acts by thought. All our calculations,
all our relationships, all our behaviour is based on thought, which
is knowledge, and that knowledge is measurable, more or less, a

great deal or wide, it is measurable. And knowledge is always in
the field of the known. And can man, can you and I, realize the
importance of knowledge and see its limitations and go beyond it?
That is my problem - you understand? That is what I want to find
out. Because I see if you are always functioning in the field of
knowledge, you will always be prisoners, very limited with certain
expansive or narrow borders, which are always measurable. And
therefore the mind will always be held within the frontiers of
knowledge. Right? I am asking myself whether knowledge, which
is experience, whether gathered in the last few days, or in the
many, many centuries, whether that knowledge can free man so
that he can function wholly differently, so that he is not living
always in the past, which is knowledge? Are we meeting?
You know this question has been put quite differently by many
people, who are really quite serious, specially in the religious
world: whether man is always time-bound, which is knowledge?
That is, bound to the past, the present and the future. And they
have always asked this question - at least those great scholars and
pundits and gurus who have talked with me - they have always
asked me whether man can go beyond time - not science fiction
time - you are following? - but actually not be a slave to time,
because time is measurable, knowledge is measurable, action in the
field of knowledge is measurable, and therefore man unless he
frees himself from that field will always be a slave. You may
decorate the field, you may do all kinds of things within the field,
make it beautiful, unpolluted - you know - no poverty and all the
rest of it, but he will always live within the limitation of that field,
which is time, measure, knowledge. Right? Will you ask that

question of yourself? Please do! That is: is man always bound to
the past with its knowledge, experience and action? If he is he can
never possibly be free. Right? He will always be conditioned and
out of that conditioning he may project an idea of freedom, a
heaven in which he will be sitting on the right hand of god - or on
the left hand, it depends on what kind of religious beliefs you have.
And thereby escape from the actual fact of time, by projecting an
idea, belief, a concept, he can escape into an illusion which may be
timeless, but is still an illusion. Right?
Now I want to find out whether man can function at all in this
world, being free of time. There is the chronological time - today,
tomorrow and the day after tomorrow, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, next week, next month, next year. If I have no
chronological time I shall miss my train, the bus. And I realize that
time must exist absolutely to function, to do anything. And that
time is measurable. Time is always measurable. And the action of
time, which is knowledge, is necessary otherwise I couldn't speak
English, I wouldn't be able to find out where I live, or take the
train, go to the office, work in a factory and so on. Knowledge as
time and action is necessary. And if that is the only thing in which
I live and function and move, I am entirely bound, I am a slave.
And my mind observes, looks, asks, and wants to find out if it can
ever be free from this chain of time? Right? That is, I see
knowledge is essential - to write a letter, to do anything I must
have knowledge. And I also see that knowledge, being measurable,
is always limited. And the mind rebels against the idea of being a
slave to time - time being tradition, the older generation, the
younger generation, the gap between the old and the young, the

whole of that is time. And being caught in that the mind rebels
against this whole idea of living in a culture which is based on
thought, and time, and knowledge. Right? I think I have explained
it enough.
Now I want to find out - the mind wants to find out whether it is
possible to go beyond time? That is, enter into the immeasurable,
which has its own space, and live in that world and function with
knowledge? Live in a world which is completely immeasurable,
free of time, and yet function with time, with knowledge, with all
the technological achievement which thought has brought about?
You are getting my point? No? This is a very important question to
ask. And the religious people, not being able to enter into
something which is not measurable, have invented a concept of
freedom, which is an illusion because that concept is the result of
thought, and therefore still within the field of time and knowledge.
Now can I, can this mind enquire into the quality and the nature
of the immeasurable, knowing very clearly that any form of
illusion, a projection by thought, is still within the field of time and
therefore knowledge? Therefore the mind must be entirely free
from any movement which might create illusion. Are you meeting
this? Because it is very easy to imagine one is in a timeless world
and go nuts over it, get neurotic, have tremendous illusions, and
think you have got god by the right hand! All that is illusion. So
what makes for illusion? You are following? What creates illusion?
Deception, a neurotic fragmentary, schizophrenic mind. Right?
What creates such an illusion? What is the factor of illusion? Are
we following each other? May I go on? I know, I know, you want
me to go on and you just listen. Please, don't do that, it's no fun.

Because you must do this, you know, actually do it, that is know
for yourself very well the limitation, the slavery, to knowledge.
And knowing that is absolutely essential, otherwise you can't do a
thing.
And also becoming aware, conscious, that one can deceive
oneself most extraordinarily, imagine that you have extraordinary
visions and all that stupid stuff. So one has to go into this question
very, very carefully. First not to deceive oneself under any
circumstances, not to be a hypocrite, not have double standards, the
private standard and the public standard, saying one thing and
doing something else, thinking something and talking about
something else. That requires tremendous honesty, which means I
must find out what is the factor that creates, brings about, in the
mind the deception, the hypocrisy, the double talk, the illusion, the
various neurotic distortions. Unless the mind is very clear of any
distortion it cannot possibly enquire into the immeasurable. Right?
So what do you think brings illusions - illusions of grandeur,
illusions of a great sense that you have achieved reality, that you
have gathered in your fist all enlightenment - you know - the
things, the neurotic processes one has? What is the cause, without
analysis, to see for oneself very clearly where distortion takes
place? Distortion is hypocrisy, distortion is imagination, where
imagination shouldn't enter at all. It may be all right, imagination
when you are painting a picture, writing a poem, writing a book, a
novel, a detective story, but if you use imagination and say 'That
exists', then you are caught. Right? So I must find out the factor of
illusion, distortion - not only find out but be completely free of it.
Right? Have you put this question to yourself? No double

standards, personal life and public life, double talk, believe in one
thing and do something else, be a Christian with all the ideas and
mythology of Jesus and all that, and at the same time - you know be violent, cruel, bestial and all the rest of it, talk about
brotherhood and be devoted to nationalism, to divisions. So all
these are the indications of distortion.
And I want to find out if the mind can be completely free of any
distorting factor? Right? Now what distorts the mind? May I go
into it? The factor of distortion is thought. That is, thought
cultivates fear, as thought cultivates pleasure. Thought says, 'I must
enter into that timeless state because it promises freedom and
perhaps there is something more to it'. It wants to achieve, it wants
to gain, because perhaps you have greater experience there. Right?
So thought, which is knowledge, when it functions rationally,
objectively, sanely is not a distorting factor. Right? To go to the
moon - if you are neurotic you can't go to the moon, if you are a
neurotic technician in technology you can't put the thing together.
But when you get to the moon you are still Russian or American,
which is neuroticism, and there you plant a flag or do all the stupid,
childish things, which is still the action of thought. You are
following all this?
So the major factor - please listen to this - factor of distortion is
fear and the demand for pleasure through gratification. Right? So
the mind must completely be free of fear. Can it be? Don't say yes
or no, you know nothing. Let's investigate. Please see the
importance of this. The factor of distortion is fear. The factor of
distortion is the demand for pleasure, gratification, enjoyment, the
demand - not the pleasure itself but the demand for pleasure - you

are following all this - on which all our moral religious structure is
based. So I am asking myself: can this mind, the human mind, the
human mind which is the result of time, which is with its brain the
whole content of memory, extensive or small, narrow or wide,
measurable, can this mind be free of fear completely, otherwise
distortion takes place?
Now there is physical fear - fear of snakes, darkness, wild
animals, not only in the jungle but in civilization, fear of the
unknown, fear of losing what one has, fear of death, fear of not
being loved, fear of not achieving, not fulfilling, not becoming,
fear of loneliness, fear of having no relationships - you follow? fear. The very, very small fears, physical fears, and the more and
more and more complex fears, the psychological; beginning with
the physical and gradually entering into the more complex fears.
Can the mind be free of all fears, not only at the conscious level
but at the deep level? Right?
I must find this out. The mind must be completely merciless to
find this out, otherwise I enter into a world of illusion, distortion.
Physical fears, that is, physical pain, disease, ill health, we all
know the physical pains, and those physical pains leave a memory,
don't they? Right? Last week I had bad toothache, or whatever it is,
and that pain has left a mark on the brain and the memory of it please follow this - and that memory, which is thought, says, "I
must not have that pain tomorrow or next week. For god's sake be
careful. Do the right thing, eat rightly, be watchful". Thought
thinking about the past pain projects the future pain, and thereby is
afraid of the future. Right? Are you following this? It is very
simple. Now when the physical pain occurs, happens, to live with it

and end it and not carry it over. If you do, then fear comes in.
Right? That is, I had deep ugly pain a few days ago, or a month
ago, and I see the importance of not having fear. That is my vital,
intense demand, that there must be no fear, bearing that - you know
watching it. When the pain happens to end it, go through with it
completely - not be identified with it and carry it over, but to end it.
And to end that pain which has passed, you have to live with it,
haven't you, not say, "For god's sake how quickly can I get out of
it?" Self pity - you know all the nonsense that goes around pain.
Can you do all this? No. Can you, when you have pain, live with it,
not complaining, do whatever is necessary to end the pain, and
when it has gone it is finished, not carry it over. Thought carries it
over, not the pain. The pain is over but the thought, which is the
response of memory, that memory has been established when you
have pain and says you mustn't have it, when you have pain can it
not build memory? Right? Can you do it? Do you know what this
means? To be completely aware when you have pain. Complete
attention and not let it go over. Right? Do it if you are interested in
it.
So you know how to deal with physical fears. It doesn't matter
how excruciating that pain is. Then there are all the psychological
fears which are much more complex. Again the complexity is
brought about through thought. I want to be a great man and I am
not a great man. And there is the pain of not being great. I feel
terribly inferior because I have compared myself with somebody
whom I think is superior and I feel I am inferior, and therefore I
suffer from that, which is all the measurement of thought. Right?
And I am afraid of death, ending all the things I possess. We'll go

into that another time, the whole problem of that. You know this
whole psychological complexity of thought - thought always
wanting to be sure and always frightened of the uncertainty, always
wanting to achieve, knowing it may fail. And so there is a battle
between the action of thought and thought itself - you are
following all this.
So can fear end completely? Sitting here listening to the
speaker, at this present moment you are not frightened, there is no
fear because you are listening. And you can't evoke fear, which
would be artificial. But you can see that when you are attached or
dependent, this dependency and attachment is based on fear. So
you can realize your attachments, obviously, your dependencies,
psychologically depending on your wife, husband, book whatever
it is. And if you observe that attachment closely, watch it, then you
will find out in that attachment there is the root of it, which is fear,
not being able to be alone, wanting companionship - you know all
the business of it, feeling poverty, insufficiency, you know,
depending on somebody. There you see the whole structure of fear.
Now can you, being dependent, attached, can you see the
involvement of fear in it and not be attached, not be dependent
psychologically? Can you?
Now comes the test. We can play with words, with ideas, but
when it comes down to actual fact we withdraw. So when you
withdraw and don 't face the fact you are not concerned with the
understanding of illusion, therefore you prefer to live in an illusion
than to go beyond it. Right? So don't be a hypocrite. I love this, I
love to live in an illusion, in deception. Face it. Then you will
come upon fear and then you can escape from it, you can play all

kinds of tricks and get more and more neurotic, but if you like that
- remain in it, don't fight it. You understand? The more you fight it
the more fear is. But if you understand the whole nature of fear
which is dependency, and all that, and face it, look at it, then as
you observe you not only are aware of the superficial conscious
fears, but also as you observe you penetrate deeply into the
recesses of your mind. Are you doing this? So the fear comes to an
end completely, and therefore the factor of distortion ends.
And if you are pursuing or demanding pleasure that is also a
factor of delusion. I don't like this guru, but I like that guru. Right?
My guru is greater than your guru. I will go to the remote corners
of the world - India, Japan whatever it is - and find truth, truth is
round the corner, here, not in that.
So when there is the demand for pleasure - you understand? sexually, in any form, this must be a distorting factor. Because
pleasure, pleasure, you know, enjoyment, is right, isn't it? It is
lovely, it is beautiful to enjoy the sky, the moon, the clouds, the
hills, the shadows - you know - there are beautiful things, the earth.
But the mind, thought says, "I must have it more and more and
more. I must repeat this pleasure, this enjoyment, tomorrow I must
have it". And on this is based all the habits of drugs, drink - you
know - the whole of that. Which is again the activity of thought.
Seeing the mountain in the evening light, the snow peaks and the
shadows in the dark valley, and enjoying it tremendously, the
beauty, the loveliness of it, the soft light, then thought says, "I must
have that again tomorrow. It was so beautiful". So thought
demanding pleasure, pursues that experience of that sunset on
those hills, and sustains the memory. And the next time you see the

sunset that memory is strengthened. So fear and pleasure are the
distorting factors - the demands of pleasure and the fear are the
distorting factors. Right? Can the mind see that sunset, live with it
completely at that moment, and finish with it and begin again
tomorrow? You follow? So that the mind is always free from the
known. You are following all this? Though the known must be
used but it is always free. Right?
So there is a freedom, which is not measurable. You can never
say, "I am free" - you understand, that is an abomination. All that
you can enquire into is the function of thought in knowledge and is
there any action which is not measurable, which is not in the field
of the known? You are constantly learning. A mind that is
constantly learning has no fear and therefore perhaps such a mind
can then enquire into the immeasurable.
Would you like to ask any questions?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Yes sir. Yes sir. I have understood the question. May I go
into it? The question is: can one observe without any evaluation,
without any judgement, without any prejudice, is that at all
possible, or is that just another of the tricks of the mind, a
deception? You see a mountain and you recognize that it is a
mountain, it is not an elephant.
Q: You see it.
K: You see it. Just a minute sir. You see it but you recognize it
as a mountain. But you don't say, "That is an elephant". It is a
mountain. Now wait a minute. You see it, you recognize it and the
recognition is only possible when there has been memory
established as the mountain. Of course, otherwise you can't see it.

Q: I remember as a small child when I came to Switzerland, I
saw the first time a mountain without any remembrance. It was
very, very beautiful.
K: Yes sir. When you see it for the first time you don't say it is a
mountain. Somebody has told you it is a mountain. And the next
time you see it you recognize it as a mountain.
Q: I prefer it to ugly things.
K: Wait. Of course sir. You prefer that mountain to the ugly
building. It doesn't matter what it is. But when you observe there is
the whole process of recognition. You don't confuse it with a
house, with an elephant, with a crocodile, it is a mountain. Now:
then the difficult problem comes in: to observe non-verbally. That
is a mountain. I like it. I don't like it. I wish I had a house on that
hill - you follow - all the rest of it. Just to observe it. There, it is
fairly easy, isn't it? Because the mountains don't affect your life.
But your husband, your wife, your politician, your priest, your
neighbour, your man, girl, that affects you. Therefore you cannot
look at your friend, or girl, or boy without evaluation, without the
image. That is where the problem arises. Right? Can you look at
the mountain, and at your wife, husband, girl or whatever it is,
without a single image? See what happens! If you can look without
an image then you are looking for the first time. Aren't you? Then
you are looking at the earth, the stars, the mountains, the ugly
politicians and all the rest of it, for the first time. And that means
your eyes are clear, not burdened with the memories of the past.
That is all. Can you look at that tree without an image of that tree?
You understand? Go into it. Work at it. You will find out the
enormous beauty that is in this.

Q: If you look at it that way, just like you look at the mountain,
without being aware of what a factory does to its environment, you
cannot act.
K: Oh yes you do. When you look at a factory that way, can you
do anything at all? On the contrary, it is polluting the air, all that
belching of that smoke, you know, you want to do something. No
sir, don't confuse it. Keep it simple. Do it and you will see what
action comes out of it.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Is perception - I am translating this sir - is perception, seeing
something totally, is it gradual or instantaneous? Isn't that it? Is that
your question, sir? You understand the question? Can I observe
myself totally, all of myself, all the reactions, fears, the
enjoyments, the pursuit of pleasure - you know, all that - at a
glance, or have I to do little by little? Right? What do you think? If
I do it little by little, one day look at part of myself, the next day
another part of myself - you follow - little by little, is that possible
at all? What happens? Today I look at a fragment of myself and
when I pick up another fragment of myself tomorrow, what is the
relationship of the first fragment to the second fragment? And in
the interval between the perception of that first fragment and the
second fragment other factors have come into being. And so this
fragmentary examination and approach, and observation, leads to a
great deal of complexity, it has no value. So my question then is:
can I, can this mind observe totally on the instant? Right?
Q: When you observe totally on the instant, there is nothing. Is
that then myself?
K: Wait a minute madame, let's finish a little. So can I look at

myself non-fragmentarily - you understand sir? I have been
educated, conditioned to look at myself fragmentarily, look at the
world fragmentarily - Christian, Communist, Socialist, Methodist,
Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, Zen - you follow - I have been brought
up, educated in this culture, which is to look at the world
fragmentarily, as a Jew, as an Englishman, as a Catholic - you
know - all the blasted lot! So being conditioned in this culture I
cannot possible take a total view. Right? Therefore my chief
concern then is, to be free of this fragmentary education - isn't it?
Not whether I can see completely or not, but to free the mind from
fragmentation. Right? Not to be Catholic, not to be Protestant - you
know all the rest of it. To wipe away all that. I can only wipe away
all that instantly when I see the truth of it. Right? I cannot see the
truth of it if I say, "I love being a Hindu", because being a Hindu
gives me a certain position, I put on a turban and impress a lot of
silly asses! And I take pleasure in the past because tradition says
we are one of the old ancient races, and that gives me great delight.
But if I see the falseness of all that, see the truth of it, I can see the
truth only when I see the falseness - the truth is in the falseness.
Q: You have been using words to describe a non-verbal state of
mind. Is this not a contradiction?
K: You have been using words to describe the indescribable;
and isn't there a contradiction in that? Right sir? You have been
using words to describe the indescribable and isn't that a
contradiction? Now wait a minute. The description is not the
described. Right? Right sir? I can describe the mountain, but the
description is not the mountain. But if you get caught in the
description, as most people do, then you will never see the

mountain. There is no contradiction in that. And please be very
careful. I didn't describe the immeasurable - right? I said you
cannot enquire into that factor, whatever it is, if it is, if the mind
doesn't understand the whole business of thought. Right? I didn't
describe it. I only described the whole functioning of thought in
action with regard to knowledge and time. We went into that, the
other is impossible. I think that is enough for today, isn't it?

SAANEN 6TH PUBLIC TALK 29TH JULY 1971.
I would like this morning, if I may, to go into many things because
we are going to have only one more talk and the rest of the time
will be discussions.
It is obvious I think that one needs a great deal of energy energy, vitality, interest, intensity and passion to bring about a
radical change in ourselves, but also, if you are interested in the
outward phenomenon, to see what we can do in the process of
changing ourselves with the rest of the world. Not only how to
conserve energy, but also how to increase it. We dissipate energy
so endlessly - useless talk, having innumerable opinions about
everything, living in a world of concepts and formulas, and
everlasting conflict with ourselves. All these indicate a wastage of
energy - conflict, opinions, conclusions, images, formulas and so
on - these, I think, waste energy. But beyond that there is a much
deeper cause that dissipates the deep energy that is necessary not
only to change, to bring about a change in ourselves but also to
penetrate very, very deeply beyond the confines of our own
thought. We need an astonishing amount of energy. And the
ancients have said you must control sex, hold your senses in tight
rein, take up various vows so that you don't dissipate your energy,
concentrate your energy to god or whatever it is. All such forms
are also a wastage of energy because obviously when you take a
vow it is a form of resistance. Seeing all that, one needs an energy
not only to bring about a superficial change externally, but also a
deep inward transformation or revolution, and to go beyond that
one needs to have an extraordinary sense of energy which has no

cause, which has no motive, which has the capacity to be so utterly
quiet that that very quietness has its own explosive quality. We are
going to go into all that. I don't know if you are interested in it but
if you are not, tant pis, I am going on!
First one sees how human beings waste their energy - quarrels,
jealousies, this tremendous sense of anxiety and the everlasting
pursuit of pleasure, demanding it, fear and so on - that's fairly
obvious, that's a wastage of energy. And also is it not a wastage of
energy to have innumerable opinions and beliefs about everything how another should behave, what another should do and so on?
And is it not a wastage of energy to have formulas, concepts? And
in this culture we are encouraged to have concepts, to have
formulas according to which we live. Don't you have formulas,
concepts in the sense of having images, how you should be, what
should happen, the sense of thought which rejects 'what is' and
formulates 'what should be'? All such endeavour is a waste of
energy. And I hope we can proceed from there.
And what is the basic reason which dissipates a great deal of
energy? We both of us are enquiring, we are sharing the enquiry
together. I want to find out, apart from the usual cultural heritage
that one has acquired, how we waste energy, there is a much
deeper question, which is: can life function, living, carry on daily
life, without any form of resistance? A resistance is obviously will.
I know you are all brought up on will in the sense that you must,
you must not, should, should not, control - you know - will. Will is
independent of the fact. Will is the assertion of the self - please
follow all this - of the 'me' independent of 'what is'. Right? Will is
desire, the manifestation of desire is will. And we function

superficially or at great depth in this assertion of resistance of
desire as will, which is unrelated to the fact, depending on the
desire of the 'me', the self. Right? Are we meeting with each other.
Right.
So I am asking: is it possible to live in this world without the
operation of will at all, knowing what will is? Will is a form of
resistance. Will is a form of division, I will against something I
will not, I must against something I must not. So will is building a
wall in action against every other form of action. Are we meeting?
Right? I don't want to run by myself. We only know action either
conforming to a formula, to a concept, or approximating according
to an ideal, and acting in relationship to that ideal, to that pattern,
to that formula. That is what we call action. And in that there is
conflict. There is not only imitation of 'what should be' which we
have projected as an ideal, and according to that act, and therefore
there is a conflict between the act and the ideal. Right? Because in
that there is always an approximation, imitation, conformity. I hope
we are watching our own activities, our own minds, how we
exercise will in action. And I feel that is a total wastage of energy.
And I am going to show why.
As we said, will is independent of the fact, of 'what is' and
depending on the self, what it wants, not what it is but what it
wants. And that want, depending on its circumstances,
environment, culture and so on, divorced from the fact - therefore
there is contradiction. Therefore there is a resistance against 'what
is' and that is a wastage of energy.
And action means the doing now, not tomorrow or having
acted, action is in the present. Now can there be action without the

idea, without the formula, without the concept, an action in which
there is no resistance as the will, and therefore if there is will there
is contradiction and resistance and effort, which is a wastage of
energy? So I want to find out if there is an action without any will
which is the assertion of the 'me' as resistance? Are you interested
in all this?
Audience: Yes.
K: Good luck to you! I doubt it, but it's all right, I'll go on.
Because you see we are slaves to the present culture. We are the
culture and if there is to be a different kind of action, a different
kind of life and so a different kind of culture altogether, not the
counter culture but something entirely different, one must
understand this whole question of will. Will belongs to the old
culture, in which is involved ambition, drive - you know - the
whole assertion and the aggression of the 'me'. And if there is to be
a totally different way of living one has to understand the central
issue, that is: can there be action without a formula, a concept, an
ideal, a belief, an action based on knowledge which is the past and
therefore not action - follow all this - therefore conditioned, and
being conditioned if it is dependent on the past, it must inevitably
create discord and therefore conflict? So I want to find out - both
of us, we are enquiring - if there is an action in which will doesn't
enter at all and therefore choice?
We said the other day, where there is confusion there must be
choice. A man who sees things very clearly, neither neurotically
nor obstinately, he doesn't choose. So choice, will, resistance, the
'me' in action, is wastage of energy. And is there action unrelated
to all this, so that the mind lives in this world, functioning in the

field of knowledge, and yet be free to act without the impediment
of the limitation of knowledge? You know it is awfully difficult to
convey all this verbally, especially to so many people. With two or
three of us sitting together we could go into this very quickly, we
would have direct contact, direct communion, which is,
communion being sharing together as we go along very quickly,
not only at the verbal level but also at a deeper level, non-verbally.
We say, I say, the speaker says there is such action - an action in
which there is no resistance, no interference of the past, no
response of the 'me'. Now that action is instantaneous because it is
not in the field of time - time being yesterday, with all the
knowledge, experience, which acts today and the future is already
established by the past. There is an action which is instantaneous
and therefore complete, in which will doesn't operate at all. And to
find that out my mind must learn how to observe, how to see. If the
mind sees according to the formula, what you should be, or what I
should be, then action is of the past. Right? Now I am asking: is
there an action which is not motivated, which is in the present and
which doesn't bring contradiction, anxiety, conflict? As I said, the
mind which has been trained, brought up in a culture which
believes and functions and acts with will, such a mind obviously
cannot act in the sense we are talking about, because it is
conditioned and therefore it cannot. So can the mind, your mind,
see this conditioning and be free of it so as to act differently?
Right? If I, if my mind is trained, held in education, the whole
business, to function with will, then it cannot possibly understand
what it is to act without will. Therefore my concern is not how to
find out how to act without will, but rather to find out if my mind

can be free of its conditioning, which is the conditioning of will.
Right? That is my concern. And I see, as I look into myself, that
everything I do has a secret motive, is the outcome of some
anxiety, fear, the demand for pleasure and so on. Now can that
mind free itself instantly to act differently? Right? You are getting
what I am talking about?
So I must learn, the mind must learn how to look. That is the
central problem for me. This mind, which is the result of time, the
result of various cultures, experience, knowledge, can it look with
eyes that are not conditioned? That is, can it operate instantly being
free of its conditioning? So I must learn to look at my conditioning
without any desire to change, to transform and to go beyond it.
Right? I must be capable of looking at it as it is. Right? If I want to
change it then I bring about again the action of will. If I want to
escape from it, again a resistance. If I keep some and reject others,
it is again choice. And choice, as we pointed out, is confusion. So
can I, can this mind, look without any resistance, without any
choice? Can I look at the mountains, hills, trees, my neighbour, my
wife, my husband, my children, the politicians, the priests, without
any image? The image is the past. Right?
So I must be able, the mind must be able to look. So when I
look at 'what is' in myself and in the world, actually 'what is'
without resistance, then out of that observation there is instant
action which is not the result of will. Got it?
Now we are going to go into something from this, which is: I
want to find out how to live a life in this world acting, not going
off into a monastery, not escaping to some Nirvana or some guru's
assertions that if you do this you will get that - all that silly

nonsense. Putting all that aside, I want to find out how to live in
this world without any resistance, without any will - which we
have gone into a little bit. And I want to find out also what love is.
So my mind, which has been conditioned to the demand of
pleasure, to the demand of gratification, satisfaction, and therefore
resistance, all that is not love. Right? So what is love? You know
to find out 'what is', one must deny, put aside totally, what it is not.
Through negation come to the positive, not seek the positive but
come to it understanding what it is not. Right? That is, if I want to
find out what truth is, not knowing what it is, I must be able to see
what is false. If I haven't the capacity to perceive what is false, I
can't see what is truth. Right? So I must find out what is false.
What is false? Everything that thought has put together, except
technologically, is false. That is, thought has put together the 'me'.
Right? The 'me', the self with its memories, with its aggression,
with its separativeness, with its ambitions, competitiveness,
imitation, fear, and the past memories, all that has been put
together by thought, as thought has put together the extraordinary
things mechanically. So thought, as the 'me', which has in essence
no reality whatsoever, is the false. So when the mind understands
that it is false then the truth is there.
Similarly when the mind really enquires deeply into what is
love, enquires, not say "it is this", "it is that", enquires - then it
must see what it is not and completely drop it, otherwise you can't
find the real, obviously. Right? Is one capable of doing that? Say
for instance, love is not ambition. Right? Do you follow? You all
agree to that, don't you? Don't we? A mind that is ambitious,
wanting to achieve, wanting to become powerful, aggressive,

competitive, imitative, such a mind cannot possible understand
what love is. We see that, don't we? Is there any doubt about that?
Oh lord! Well if you have doubts you carry on. Now can the mind
see the falseness of it, that a mind that is ambitious cannot possibly
love, and drop it instantly because it is false? Right? Because only
when you deny completely that which is false then the other is.
So we see very clearly, perhaps verbally, intellectually, but not
actually, that a mind seeking gain, achievement either in the world,
or so-called spiritually, sitting next to god, seeking enlightenment,
you know, the drive to find out, to achieve is ambition. Therefore
can the mind see the falseness of it and completely drop it
instantly? Otherwise you won't find out what is. Otherwise you
will never find out what love is. And love is not jealousy, is it?
Love is not possessiveness. Love is not dependency. Right? Do
you see that? Not carry it over with you to the next day but drop it
instantly. The dropping of it instantly doesn't depend on will. It
depends on whether you actually see the falseness of it. Right? Do
you? And therefore when you drop that which is false, which is
not, the other is.
Now is love pleasure? It become a little more difficult. Is love
fulfilment? Sir look: one has to go into this rather deeply if you
really want to have a mind that has love. You have to go into it
very, very deeply. We are asking, is pleasure, gratification,
fulfilment, love? We went into it the other day that the demand for
pleasure is the continuity of thought, which pursues pleasure as
desire and will separate from 'what is'? We have associated love
with sex; and because there is pleasure in that we have made an
extraordinary thing of it, it has become the most important thing in

life. No? Not for us old people! But we have made sex one of the
greatest things in life. And in that we have tried to find some deep
meaning, a deep reality, a sense of great union, oneness, and other
transcendental things. It has become important because we have
nothing else in life. Knowledge becomes rather boring, imitation,
following somebody, becomes rather trivial, pursuit of money is all
right but without money you can't have the other. So sex and
pleasure have become the most astonishing thing in civilization.
And that is what we call love.
So is pleasure love? And also why has sex such significance in
our life? Probably we have nothing else. Probably in every other
field we are mechanical. There is nothing original in ourselves,
there is nothing creative, not in the sense of producing pictures and
songs, poems, that is a very superficial part of that which is really a
sense of creativeness. So as we are more or less secondhand people
sex becomes extraordinarily important and therefore pleasure. And
that is why we call it love and behind that mask do all kinds of
mischievous things.
So can we find out what love is? You know this has been an
everlasting question, it is not just put now. Man has asked this and
not being able to find it, he says, "Love god", "Love an idea",
"Love the State", "Love your neighbour" - not that you shouldn't
love your neighbour, but these have become merely a social
operation, not love that really is always new. So love is not the
product of thought, which is pleasure. As we said thought is old,
not free, it is the response of the past. And so love has no
relationship with thought. And most of one's life is a battle, as we
know - the strain, the anxiety, the guilt, the despair, the immense

sense of loneliness, sorrow, that is our life. That is actually 'what
is'. And we are unwilling to face that. Now can the mind face all
that, not resist it? And when you face all that without choice and
resistance, what takes place? When you face it, not try to overcome
fear, overcome jealousy, this or that, but actually look at it without
any sense of wanting to change it, conquer it, control it, just to
observe it totally, give your whole attention to it - which is our life,
our daily life of travail, our daily life of the bourgeois, including
the non-bourgeois. To look at it. What takes place? Haven't you
then tremendous energy, because energy has been dissipated in
resisting it, in overcoming it, in going beyond it, trying to
understand it, trying to change it? So when you do look at this life
as it is, then is there not a transformation of 'what is'? And that
transformation takes place only when you have this energy in
which the operation of will doesn't exist at all.
You know we like explanations, we like theories, we indulge in
speculative philosophy and we are carried away by all that - which
is obviously such a waste of time and energy. And now when one
observes the life as it is, the misery, the poverty, the pollution, the
wretched division of peoples and nations, the wars, as it is, which
each human being has created, it hasn't come into existence
miraculously, each one of us is responsible for all this. And to
change all this we must face what actually is.
And also we must face one of the most important things in life,
death. No? That is one of the things that man has avoided all the
time. The ancient civilizations and the modern civilizations have
tried to go beyond that, somehow conquer it, imagine there is
immortality, life after death, anything but face it. Now can the

mind face something of which it knows absolutely nothing? You
know most of you unfortunately, if I may say so, have read so
much about all these things. You have read probably what Indian
philosophers, teachers, have told us, have said, or you have read
other philosophers, and your own Christian training. You are full
of other people's knowledge, assertions and opinions. You are
bound to be although you may not consciously acknowledge it, it is
there in the blood, because you were brought up in this civilization,
in this culture. And here is something of which you know
absolutely nothing. All that you know is that you are frightened.
That is all you know. Frightened of coming to an end - and that is
what death is. Fear prevents you from looking at it, because fear
has prevented you from living - you understand - not living with
anxiety, pain, sorrow, guilt ambition - you know all that brutal
business. So fear has prevented you from living, and fear prevents
you from looking at what death is. And so fear must have comfort.
So there is the whole sense of incarnation, the renewal of another
life and so on and so on - which we won't go into because what we
are concerned with is to face this thing: whether your mind can
face the reality of an ending, because that is what is going to
happen, logically or illogically, while you are healthy or unhealthy,
crippled or fairly well off, old age, disease, accident, anything can
happen. Can the mind look at this enormous unknown question?
Can you look at it as though for the first time? You understand my
question? For the first time, having nobody to tell you what to do,
knowing that to find comfort is an escape from the fact. So can you
as though for the first time face something which is inevitable?
So what is the mind that is capable of looking at something of

which it knows absolutely nothing except that there is organic
death, the organism coming to an end? Right? Through heart
failure, through tension, through emotions, etc., etc., disease and so
on. But the question, the psychological question which is: can the
mind face something knowing it knows absolutely nothing about it
and look at it, live with it, understand it completely? Which means,
can it look at it without any sense of fear, the moment you have
fear you have choice, the moment you have fear there is will, there
is resistance, and that is a wastage of energy. The ending of energy
as the 'me' is the incapacity to look at death.
Now to face something I don't know at all demands great
energy, doesn't it? Not demands, to face something of which I
know absolutely nothing, I can only do that when there is no will,
no resistance, no choice - you follow - no wastage of energy. To
face something unknown there must be the highest form of energy.
And when there is that total energy, is there death? Is there a fear
of death? Or is there a fear of continuity? It is only there is fear of
not being, or being, living, or not living, only when I have lived a
life of resistance, will and choice. And when the mind is faced with
the unknown and all these things have gone - the wastage - there is
tremendous energy. And when there is that supreme energy, which
is intelligence, is there death? You find out.
Now would you like to ask questions please?
Q: Sir, you have questioned this morning the religions, and
what they say, which prompts me to ask: how is it that I can
understand on an intellectual level that which you say, it seems to
be sensible, it seems to be reasonable, it has sense and yet I lack
the passion.

K: What you say intellectually, verbally, makes some kind of
sense. I see, the questioner says, the logic of it, but somehow it
doesn't penetrate, it doesn't go very deep, it doesn't touch the
source of things so that I can break through - right sir? You have
understood the question?
I accept intellectually, verbally, what you talk about but it
leaves me rather cold, it doesn't bring that sense of driving vitality,
interest, that stirring of - not emotion, not sentiment, not
excitement, not enthusiasm, all that is kind of silly stuff - but the
complete sense of living with it. Right sir? I am afraid that is the
case with most people.
Q: Most people don't fear death but suffering.
K: Please don't answer, explain. Let us examine. The gentleman
says that what you say is logical, intellectually I accept and so on,
but I don't feel it deep in my heart and therefore don't bring about a
change, a revolution in myself and live totally a different kind of
life. And I say that is the case with most of us. We go part of the
way, take the journey together a little distance and draw back.
Keep up the interest for ten minutes and the rest of the hour think
about something else. Go away after the talk and carry on with
your daily - you know - sordid, or beautiful, or noble, or ignoble
life. Now why does this happen? Why does this happen that you
intellectually, verbally, logically, understand and apparently it
doesn't touch you deeply so that you will, like a fire, burn out the
old? Wait sir, listen, slowly, slowly. Why doesn't this happen? Is it
lack of interest? Is it a sense of deep laziness, indolence? Examine
it sir, examine it. Don't answer me. Examine it. Lack of interest? If
it is lack of interest, why? Why aren't you interested? When the

house is burning - your house, your children are going to grow up,
killed - you follow? - all the monstrous things that are going to
happen - why aren't you interested? Are you blind, insensitive,
indifferent, callous? Or deeply you haven't the energy and therefore
you are lazy, indolent, don't care - you know? Wait sir, examine it,
don't agree - please sirs, don't agree or disagree, examine it. Or you
have become so insensitive because you have your own problems you know - you want to fulfil, you are inferior, you are superior,
you are anxious, you have a great sense of fear - all that. Your
problems are smothering you therefore you are not interested in
anything else unless you solve your problems first. But your
problems are the other man's problems, your problems are the
result of this culture in which we live. Please sirs do listen.
So which is it? Total indifference, insensitivity, callousness? Or
your whole culture, training, has been intellectual, verbal, your
philosophies are verbal, theories, the product of tremendously
cunning brains? And you have been brought up in that. Your whole
education is based on that. Is it that - please listen to this - is it that
thought has been given such extraordinary importance, the mind,
clever, cunning, capable, efficient, technological mind, the mind
that can measure, construct, fight, organize, and you have been
trained in that, and you respond on that level, say, "Yes, I agree
with you intellectually, verbally, I see the logic of it, the sequence
of it," and you can't go beyond it because your mind is caught in
the operations of thought which is measurement. It can measure,
thought can measure, not depth or height, but on its own level - I
won't go into all that.
So this is really an important question for everybody because

most of us agree with all this, verbally, intellectually, but somehow
the fire doesn't get lit.
Yes sir?
Q: I think there is no change because the important things are
not actually on the intellectual level but on another level which is
that of the interest, that of the class, that of the psychological things
which condition us.
K: That is what we said sir. That is what I said sir. There is no
change, the gentleman says, because psychologically,
economically, socially, in education we are conditioned. We are
the result of the culture in which we live. And he says as long as
that is not changed in us we won't take any deep interest. That is
exactly what we are saying sir. So I am asking why is it that though
you listen to all this logically and I hope with a healthy mind, why
doesn't this light a fire so that you burn with all this? Please ask
yourselves.
Yes sir?
Q: I wonder if argument and wars are consequences of culture,
or lack of culture?
K: You can use the word 'culture' in different ways. Is it lack of
culture that produces war or is it the culture which produced the
war? You can play with words.
Sir please, go into this, find out: do you agree logically,
verbally, superficially, why is it that deeply it doesn't touch you?
Take away your money, it will touch you. Take away your sex, it
will touch you. Take away your sense of importance, then you will
battle. Take away your gods, your nationalism, your petty
bourgeois, and all the rest of it, you will fight like dogs and cats.

Which all indicates that intellectually we are capable of anything going to the moon and all the rest of it, technologically. We live on
the level of thought, and thought cannot possibly ignite the flame,
which changes man. What changes man is to face all this, look at
it, and not always live on that very, very superficial level.
Q: You said this morning that when you are capable of looking
at death as the absolute unknown, that includes that you also are
capable of looking at life as it is and also including that you are
capable of action.
K: Yes sir, yes sir.
Q: That you are in a state of now.
K: That's right, sir. He says when you are capable - now wait a
minute, the word 'capable' is a difficult word. Capacity means
working, to have capacity for something - again a difficult meaning
of that word - you know you can cultivate capacity. Right? I can
cultivate the capacity to play golf, tennis, to put machinery
together. Now we are not using the word 'capacity' in the sense of
time. You understand? Capacity involves time, doesn't it? That is, I
am not capable now but give me a year and I'll be capable of
speaking Italian, French or putting machinery together - capacity
implies time. If you have understood capacity as time, I don't mean
that. I mean observe the unknown without any fear, observe, live
with it. That doesn't need capacity. I said you will do it if you know
what is false, and the rejection of all that.
Yes sir?
Q: Is it not a question of we don't know how to listen.
K: We don't know how to listen.
Q: You have said that it is one of the hardest things to do, to

listen.
K: Yes sir. It is one of the hardest things to do, to listen. Do you
mean to say a man, who is committed to social activity and has put
all his life into it, and for various psychological reasons is ever
going to listen to any of this? Or a man who says, "I have taken a
vow of celibacy" - will he listen to all this? No sir. Listening is
quite an art. Right. Isn't that enough for today. Yes, sir?
Q: You were saying that the difficulty is on the intellectual level
and that we do not allow our feelings and our emotions to come
into our relations with other people. But I have the impression it is
exactly the contrary. I think that most of the trouble in the world is
caused by uncontrolled emotions and passions, probably born out
of lack of understanding. But they are passions.
K: The gentleman says: we don't live on the intellectual level,
we live with shoddy emotions, with our petty little anxieties and
worries and angers and jealousies - emotions. Since we don't know
how to conquer those we lead a miserable life - right sir?
Q: Violent.
K: Violent, of course, that's understood. Now do you live an
emotional life, a sentimental life, which needs conquering?
Emotionally, that is, you know, excitement, pleasure and all that
enthusiasm, sentimentality, do you live in that world? And when
you do live in that world, and when it gets rather disorderly then
the intellect comes in and then you begin to control it, say, "I
mustn't" but intellect always dominates.
Q: Or it justifies.
K: Of course sir, justifies or condemns. But I may be greatly
emotional but intellect comes along and says, look, be careful, try

to control yourself. So intellect always dominates, which is
thought. No? Oh lord! Right sir, let's go into it.
Look, in my relationship with another I get angry, irritated,
emotional, in my relationship. Then what happens? That leads to
trouble. There is a quarrel that takes place with two human beings.
Then I try to control it, which is thought, because it has established
a pattern for itself, what it should not, or what it should, says, "I
must control". Right? So then we say, there must be control
otherwise relationship breaks down. Isn't all that a process of
thinking? An intellectual process? And intellect plays a tremendous
part in our life, that is all that we are pointing out. We are not
saying emotions are wrong or right, or true, but thought with its
measurement is always judging, evaluating, controlling,
overcoming and therefore thought prevents you from looking.
That's all sirs. We meet the day after tomorrow.

SAANEN 7TH PUBLIC TALK 1ST AUGUST 1971.
You know we have talking about the various contradictory states of
the world, outside our skin as it were - the refugees, their torture,
and the horrors of war, poverty, the national division, and the
religious separations of people, and the economic and social
injustice. It is not merely verbal statements but actual facts of what
is going on in the world - violence, terrible mess, hatred and every
form of corruption. And in ourselves the same phenomenon is
going on, we are at war with ourselves, unhappy, dissatisfied,
seeking something which we don't know about but we are seeking,
we are violent, aggressive, corrupt and astonishingly miserable,
lonely and with a great deal of suffering. And somehow we don't
seem to be able to get out, to be free of these conditionings. We
have tried every form of behavioural therapy, religious sanctions
and their pursuits, the monastic life, a life of sacrifice, denial,
suppression, and blindly seeking, going from one book to another,
or one religious guru to another, political reforms, revolutions. We
have tried so many things, and yet somehow we don't seem to be
able to free ourselves from this terrible mess, in ourselves, as well
as outwardly. And we follow the latest guru who offers some
system, panacea, some way to crawl out of our own misery, and
that again doesn't seem to resolve any of our problems. And I think
the average person here asks: I know I am all this, caught in a trap
of civilization, miserable, rather a small narrow life and sorrowful;
I have tried this and that but somehow all this chaos is in me still,
what am I to do, how am I to get out of all this confusion?
We have talked, taking various things during these seven talks,

of order, fear, pain, love and death, sorrow, and at the end of the
day, at the end of these meetings, for most of us we are where we
began, perhaps slightly modified, slight peripheral changes, but at
the very root of our being, our whole structure and nature more or
less remains as it was. And how is all that to be really jolted, break
out so that when you do leave this place at least for one day, for
one hour, there will be something totally new, a life that really has
significance, has a meaning, has depth and width.
I would like, if I may this morning, a rather lovely morning, I
don't know if you have noticed the hills, the mountains, the river
and the lengthening shadows of the morning and the pine trees
dark against the blue sky, and those extraordinary hills full of light
and shade - on a morning like this, sitting in a tent to talk about
serious things seems rather absurd when everything about us is
crying with great joy, shouting to the heavens the beauty of the
earth and the misery of man. But since we are here, fortunately or
unfortunately, I would like this morning to approach the whole
problem in a different way. You just listen to it, not only the
meaning of the words, not only the descriptions, because the
description, as we said the other day, is never the described, when
you describe the hills, the trees, the rivers, the shadows, but if you
don't see them for yourselves, with your heart and your mind, the
description has very little meaning. It is like describing good food
to a hungry man, he must have food and not just words and the
smell of words.
I don't quite know how to put all this differently. I am going to
try. I don't know quite where it is going to lead, I haven't come
prepared, logically thought out and come here and spurt it out, but I

would like to explore - if you will together with me - a different
way of looking at all this, from a totally different dimension. Not
the usual dimension of me and you, and we and they, and my
problems and their problems, how to end this and how to get that,
how to become more beautiful, intelligent, lovely and noble, but
rather see together if we can observe all this phenomenon from a
different dimension. And perhaps some of us are not used to that
dimension, we don't know if there actually is a different dimension,
we may speculate about it, we may imagine, but the speculation
and the imagination are not the fact. So as we are only dealing with
facts and not with speculations, beliefs, ideologies, it behoves us, I
think, to not only listen to what the speaker is going to say, but also
try to go beyond the words and the explanations. Which means you
must also be sufficiently attentive, and interested, sufficiently
aware of the meaning of a dimension which we have probably not
touched at all. And if I can this morning look at that dimension, not
with my eyes but the eyes of objective intelligence and beauty and
interest.
I do not know if you have ever thought about space. Where
there is space there is silence. Not the space created by thought but
a space that has no frontiers at all, a space that is not measurable,
that cannot be connived at, put together, a space that is really quite
unimaginable. Because when man has space, real space, width and
depth and immeasurable sense of extension, not of his
consciousness, which is merely another form of thought extending
itself with measurement, from a centre - but that sense of space
which is not conceived by thought. Now when there is that kind of
space there is absolute silence. And with the over crowding of

cities, the noise, the contradictory preachers and their gurus, the
exploding population, outwardly there is more and more
restriction, there is less and less space. I do not know if you have
not noticed in this valley how new buildings are going up, more
people, more and more cars polluting, all the horrors that go on
with over crowded cities.
So outwardly there is less and less space, you go into any street
in a crowded town and you will notice this, especially in the East.
If you ever go there you will see thousands of people sleeping on
the pavement, over crowded, living on the pavement. And take any
big town, New York, London or what you will, Paris, there is
hardly space, the houses are small, they are living in kinds of
drawers, enclosed, trapped in. And where there is no space there is
violence - no space economically, socially, or space in our own
mind; and therefore we are partly responsible for this violence
because we have no space. And in our own minds the space that we
create is isolation, a wall built around ourselves. Please do observe
this in yourselves and not because the speaker is talking about it,
just observe it. Our space is a space of isolation and withdrawal,
we don't want to be hurt anymore, we have been hurt when we
were young and the marks of the hurt remain, and so we withdraw,
we resist, we build a wall around ourselves and around those whom
we think we like or love, and that has a very limited space. It is like
looking over the wall into another person's garden, or into another
person's mind, but still the wall is there. And in that world there is
very little space. In that space, narrow, small, rather shoddy little
space, from there we act, we think, we love, we function. And from
that centre we try to reform the world, joining this or that party. Or

from that little narrow hole, which is certainly in space, we try to
find a new guru that will teach us the latest way to enlightenment.
And in our minds crowded with knowledge, rumours, opinions,
chattering, there is hardly any space at all.
I do not know if you have not noticed this extraordinary
phenomenon, that the longer we live in observation, in awareness,
not just live earning money and putting away a little bank account,
you know, sex and all this and that, which is part of life, but if one
has been observant, aware of the things around one and in oneself,
one must have noticed what a little space one has. How crowded it
is in ourselves. Please watch it in yourself. And how is one, being
isolated in that little space, with enormous thick walls of resistance,
of ideas and of aggression, how is one to have space that is really
immeasurable? As we said the other day, thought is measurable,
thought is measure. And any form of self-improvement is measure,
and obviously self-improvement is the most callous form of
isolation. And one sees that thought cannot bring about the vast
space in which there is complete and utter silence. You are
following. Thought cannot bring it. Thought can only progress,
evolve, in ratio to the end it projects, which is measurable. And
that space, which thought creates, imaginatively, or of necessity,
can never enter or come into a dimension in which there is space
which is not of thought. You understand my question? Thought has
built, through centuries, a space that is very, very limited, narrow,
isolated, and because of this very isolation, narrowness, it creates
division, and where there is division there is conflict, nationally,
religiously, politically, in every way, in relationship and so on.
That conflict is measure - the less conflict and the more conflict

and so on.
Now the question is: how can thought enter into the other; or
the other is not - thought can never enter it - you have understood?
I am the result of thought, all my activities are based on thought logic, illogic, neurotic, or highly educated, sophisticated, rational,
scientific, technological. I am the result of all that. And that has
space within the walls of resistance. Now how is the mind to
change all that and discover something which is a totally different
dimension? You have understood my question? Are we meeting
each other? Can the two come together? The freedom in which
there is complete silence and therefore vast space, and the walls of
resistance which thought has created, with its narrow little space can the two come together and flow together? Right? This has been
the problem of man, religiously, when he enquires at great depth
this is the problem. Can I hold on to my little ego, to my little
space, to the things that I have collected, knowledge, the
experiences, the hopes, the pleasures and move into a different
dimension where the two can operate? I want to sit at the right
hand of god and yet I want to be free of god. I want to live a life of
great delight and pleasure and beauty, and also I want to have joy
which is not measurable, which cannot be caught by thought. You
are following? I want pleasure and joy. I know the movement of
pleasure, the demands of pleasure, the pursuit of pleasure, with all
its fears, travails, sorrow, agony, anxiety. And also I know that joy
which is totally uninvited, which thought can never capture - if it
does capture it becomes pleasure and then the old routine begins.
So I want to have both - the things of the world and the other
world.

I think this is the problem with most of us - isn't it? To have a
thumping good time in this world - why not? - and avoid all pain,
all sorrow because I also know other moments when there is great
joy which cannot be touched, which is not corrupt: I want both.
And that is what we are seeking. Carry all our burden and yet
seeking freedom. And can I do this? Can I, through will - you
understand what we said the other day about will, will has nothing
whatsoever to do with the actual, 'what is', but will is the
expression of desire as 'me', and we think somehow through will
we shall come upon the other. And so we say to ourselves, "I must
control thought, I must discipline thought". When the 'I' says, I
must control, discipline thought, it is still thought separating itself
as the 'I' and thought as something separate, but it is still thought,
the 'I' and the 'not I'. And thought, one realizes, being measurable,
being noisy, chattering, running all over the place, has created the
space of a little rat, a monkey that chases its own tail. So one says,
how is thought to become quiet? Because thought has created the
technological world and the world of chaos, the world of war, the
national divisions, the religious separations; thought has brought
about misery, confusion, sorrow; thought is time. So time is
sorrow. And one sees all this - if you have gone very, very deeply,
not at the instruction of another, but merely observing this in the
world and in yourself.
Then the question arises: can thought be completely silent and
only function when necessary? Do you follow? When necessary,
when it has to use knowledge, technology, going to the office,
talking and all the rest of it; and the rest of the time absolutely
quiet. The more there is that space and silence the more it can

function logically, sanely, healthily, with knowledge. Otherwise
knowledge becomes an end in itself and brings about chaos. Are
you following all this? Not agreeing with me, you see it for
yourself.
So the question is: thought, which is the response of memory,
knowledge, experience, time, and thought is the content of
consciousness, knowing thought must function with knowledge,
and it can only function with the highest intelligence only when
there is space and silence, and from there function. Am I making
myself clear? Have I? Have I sir? Do tell me. Encourage me! No, I
don't want your encouragement, sorry!
So that is my problem. That is, there must be vast space and
silence because when there is that space and silence beauty comes,
love then is. Not the beauty put together by man, the architecture,
the tapestry, the porcelain, the painting, the poems, the line of the
architecture, of the architect, but that sense of beauty of vast space
and silence. And yet thought must act, function. There is no living
there and then coming down. So that is my problem - not my
problem really because - you understand? I am making it a
problem so that we can investigate it together, so that both you and
I discover something in this totally new. Because each time one
investigates, not knowing, one discovers something. But if you
investigate with knowing then you will never discover anything.
And that is what we are doing. Can thought become silent? And
can that thought, which must function in the field of knowledge,
totally, completely objectively, sanely, healthily, rationally, can
that thought end itself? That is, can thought which is the past,
which is memory, which is a thousand yesterdays, can all that past

come totally to an end, which is all that conditioning so that there
is silence, there is space, there is a sense of extraordinary
dimension?
So I am asking myself and you are asking it with me, how is
thought to end, and not in the very ending of it pervert it and go off
into some imaginative state and become rather lopsided, neurotic
and vague? Thought must function with great vitality, great energy,
logically, sanely. And so I am asking how is that thought, which
must function, and at the same time to be completely motionless?
You have got it? You have got my question? This has been the
problem of every serious religious man - not the man who belongs
to some sect, whether Christian, Hindu, Buddhist, whatever it is,
which are based on organized belief and propaganda and therefore
not religion at all, this has been the problem. As one digs very,
very deeply, can the two operate together? You understand? Can
the two move together, not coalesce, not join together, move
together? And they can only move together if thought doesn't
separate itself as the observer and the observed. You are getting it?
Do you follow? I want to spin ahead!
You see life is a movement in relationship, constantly moving,
changing, and that movement can sustain itself, move freely when
there is no division between the thinker and the thought. That is,
when thought doesn't divide itself as the 'me' and the 'not me',
when thought doesn't divide itself as the observer, the experiencer,
and the observed and the experienced. Because in that there is
division and therefore conflict. When thought sees the truth of that,
then it is not seeking experience, then it is moving in experiencing.
Are you getting this? Aren't you doing this now? Look sir, I said

just now thought with all the knowledge, always accumulating, is a
living thing, not a dead thing, therefore the vast space can move
together with thought. And when thought separates itself as the
thinker, as the experiencer then the experiencer, the observer, the
thinker becomes the past and therefore there is a division, and
conflict, and the past which is stationary - right? - and therefore
cannot move. Are you getting this? Am I talking to myself, or are
we sharing this together?
I see in this examination, the mind sees that where there is
division in thought, movement is not possible. Movement. Where
there is division the past comes in, and therefore the past becomes
stationary, the centre, the immovable centre, the immovable centre
can be modified, added, but it is an immovable state and therefore
it has no free movement.
So my next question is, to myself and therefore to you: does
thought see this, or is perception something entirely different from
thought? Look: one sees division in the world, national, religious,
economic, social and all the rest of it, class, and in this division
there is conflict. That is clear. And - just listen to this, I have got it
- and when there is division in myself, fragmentation, there must
be conflict. Then in myself I am divided as the observer and the
observed, the thinker and the thought, the experiencer and the
experience, that very division is created by thought, and thought,
which is the result of the past. Now I see the truth of this. My
question is: does thought see this, or some other factor sees this?
Are you meeting me? When I say I see this, the truth of this, does
thought see the truth or some other factor sees the truth? Or the
new factor is intelligence and not thought?

So what is the relationship between thought and intelligence?
Do you understand my question? I am terribly interested in this
personally, you can come with me or not. It is extraordinary to go
into this. Thought has created this division, the past, the present,
the future. Thought is time. And thought says to itself, I see this
division outwardly and inwardly. And I see this division is the
factor of conflict. And it is not capable to go beyond it. Therefore it
says, I am where I began, I am still with my conflicts, because
thought says, I see the truth of division and conflict. Now does
thought see that, or a new factor of intelligence sees that? Right?
Now if it is intelligence that sees that, then what is the relationship
between thought and intelligence? Is intelligence personal? Is
intelligence the result of book knowledge, logic, living,
experience? Or is intelligence the freedom from the division which
thought has created and logically seeing that and not being able to
go beyond it, remains with it, not trying to struggle with it, and not
trying to overcome it, out of that comes intelligence? Right sir?
Am I making myself clear?
You see we are asking: what is intelligence? Is intelligence
cultivatable, is intelligence innate? And does thought see the truth
of conflict, division and all the rest of it, or is it the quality of mind
that sees the fact and is completely quiet with the fact, completely
silent with the fact, not trying to go beyond it, overcome it, change
it, but completely still with the fact? It is that stillness that is
intelligence. So intelligence is not thought. Intelligence is this
silence, and therefore totally impersonal. It doesn't belong to any
group, to any person, to any race, to any culture.
So I have found, my mind has found that where there is silence,

not put together by thought and disciplined, practice and all that
terrible horror, but seeing, seeing that thought cannot possibly go
beyond itself because thought is the result of the past, and where
the past is functioning it must create division, and therefore
conflicts and all the rest of it, seeing that and remaining completely
still with that. You know it is like being completely still with
sorrow. You know somebody whom you love or for whom you
care, whom you have looked after, cherished, loved, been
concerned with, when that person dies there is the shock of
loneliness, despair, sense of isolation, everything falls round you,
in that sorrow to remain with it, not seeking explanations, the
cause, why should he go and why not I, to remain completely still
with it. To remain with it completely still is intelligence. And that
intelligence then can operate in thought, using knowledge and that
knowledge and thought will not create division. I have got it.
So the question arises from that: how is the mind, your mind,
which is so endlessly chattering - listen to this please, listen to it which is so endlessly bourgeois, caught in a trap, struggling,
seeking, going after the masters and you know gurus, and
discipline, how is that mind to be completely still?
Now: you know harmony is stillness - harmony, not discord harmony between the body, the heart and the mind. Complete
harmony. That means the body, your body, must not be imposed
upon by the mind, disciplined by the mind, disciplined by the mind
when it likes a certain kind of food, tobacco, drugs - you follow the excitement of all that, being controlled by the mind, then it is
an imposition. Whereas the body when it is sensitive, alive, has its
own intelligence, not spoilt. One must have such a body, terribly

alive, sensitive, active, not drugged. And also one must have a
heart - you understand - not excitement, not sentiment, not
emotion, not enthusiasm but that sense of fullness - you know depth, quality, vigour. That can only be when there is love. And a
mind that has immense space, then there is harmony.
Now how is the mind - listen to this - to come upon this? I am
sure you are all asking this, perhaps not sitting there but when you
go home, when you walk, how can one have this sense of complete
unity, integrity without any sense of distortion, division,
fragmentation - the body, the heart and the mind - how do you
think you can have it? Now you see the fact of this, don't you? You
see the truth of it that you must have complete harmony in
yourself, the mind, the heart, the body. It is like having a clear
window, unspotted, without any scratches, unsullied, then as you
look out through the window you can see the thing without any
distortion. Now how can you have that?
Now who sees this truth? You are following? Who sees the
truth that there must be this harmony, complete harmony? As we
said, when there is harmony there is silence. When one of the three
become distorted there is trouble, there is noise. But when the
mind, the heart and the organ are completely in harmony there is
silence. Now who sees this fact? You understand my question? Do
you see it as an idea, as a theory, as something you 'should have'?
If you do then it is all the function of thought, then you will say,
tell me what the system is, what kind of system I must have to get
this, I will practise, I will deny, I will discipline, I will cook myself
brown. All that is the activity of thought. But when you see the
truth of this - the truth not what 'should be' - when you see that is

the fact, it is so, then it is intelligence that sees it. Therefore it is
intelligence that will function and therefore bring about this state.
You get it? Not thought. I can't do any more.
So thought is of time. Intelligence is not of time. So intelligence
is immeasurable - not the scientific intelligence, not the
intelligence of a technician, not the intelligence of a housewife, not
the intelligence of a man who knows a tremendous lot. Those are
all within the field of thought and knowledge. And it is only when
the mind is completely still - and it can be still, you don't have to
practise, control, it can be completely still - and when it is, there is
harmony, there is vast space and silence. And it is only then the
immeasurable is. Right sirs.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: The gentleman says that he has been listening to the speaker
for fifty years, and it is more real now than it has ever been, it is
more factual, real in his life, than it has ever been. And he wants
corroboration from others - whether others who have listened to the
speaker for fifty years feel the same. Don't please reply. This is not
a confession.
Q: To die every moment.
K: To die every moment. Yes. To die every minute. I have been
saying that, and he says that is more real than ever.
Must you listen to the speaker for fifty years? And at the end of
fifty years you will get it, you will understand it? Does it take
time? Or you see the beauty of something instantly and therefore it
is? Now why do people, anybody, you and others, why do you take
time over all this? You understand my question? Why must you
take many years to understand a very simple thing? And it is very

simple, I assure you. It only becomes complex in explanation. But
the fact is extraordinarily simple. Why doesn't one see that
simplicity and the truth and the beauty of it instantly and therefore
the whole phenomena of life changes? Why? Is it that we are so
heavily conditioned? And if you are so heavily conditioned can't
you see that conditioning instantly, or must you peel it off like an
onion, layer after layer? Is it that one is lazy, indolent, indifferent,
caught with one's own problems? If you are caught in your own
problem, one problem, and that problem is not separated from the
rest of the problems, they are all interrelated, if you took one
problem and went to the very end of it - whether it is sex, whether
it is relationship, whether it is loneliness, whatever it is - go to the
very end of it. And because you can't do it, therefore you have to
listen to somebody for fifty years! Are you going to say it takes
you fifty years to look at those mountains?
Q: Can you answer this question that I have written?
K: No sir, just ask. (Krishnamurti reads the question.) Oh lord!
This is such a long question sir. Can't you make it short?
Q: The working of the imagination.
K: The question says: I know many persons through practising
Hatha Yoga only betray themselves, they live obviously in
imagination. Do you know anything about yoga? Do you want me
to tell you about it? Yes? Too bad!
I was told Hatha Yoga and all the complications of it - I'll go
into it briefly - was invented about three thousand years ago - I was
told, I haven't read it - I was told by a man who has studied the
whole thing very carefully. At that time the rulers of the land had
to keep their brains and their thought very clear. And so they

chewed some kind of leaf from the Himalayan mountains - don't
search for it, it is dead!. (Laughter.) And as time went on the plant
died and so they had to invent a method by which the various
glands in the human system could be kept healthy and vigorous.
And they invented yoga, practices to keep the body very healthy,
not young, don't get lost in all that foolery. To keep it alive, keep it
healthy and therefore the mind very active, clear. And the practice
of certain exercises, asanas and so on, do keep the glands, certain
glands doing certain exercises, very healthy, active.
And they also found that the right kind of breathing, inhalation,
helps, not to achieve enlightenment, but to keep the mind, the brain
cells, supplied with sufficient air, so that it can function. Then
came along all the exploiters, who said, if you do all these things
then you will get - you know - you will have a quiet silent mind.
Their silence is the silence of thought, which is corruption and
therefore death. And they said, this way you will awaken various
centres, kundalini and all that kind of stuff and you will have
marvellous enlightenment. And of course our minds are so eager,
so greedy, wanting more experiences, being better than somebody
else, better looking, better body, better this and better that, we fall
into the trap of that. But one can see this kind of yoga, Hatha Yoga,
doing the various exercises, which the speaker does about two
hours a day, don't copy him, you know nothing about it.
You see when one has imagination, which is all the function of
thought, do what you will, the mind can never be quiet, peaceful,
with a sense of great inward beauty and sufficiency.
Q: In this harmonious, integrated state, when the mind functions
strictly in a technological way, is there then this separation of the

observer of the observed? When harmony exists does the
separation exist when the mind must function in a technological
realm - is there then the separation?
K: Yes I understand. I understand the question. The questioner
asks: when there is this sense of harmony, then when thought
functions, then is there the division between the thinker and the
thought. What do you think? You understand the question? When
there is complete harmony, not imaginative harmony and all the
rest of it, real, the body, the heart and the mind completely
harmonious, integrated, not fragmentary, no one to integrate it - the
word integration is rather difficult - then when there is that sense of
intelligence which is harmony, that intelligence using thought, then
will there be the observer and the observed, the division?
Obviously not. Right? When there is no harmony then there is
fragmentation, there is disharmony, then thought creates the
division as the 'me' and the 'not me', the observer and the observed.
This is so simple. Right?
Q: You said in your second talk that one should be aware not
only in the waking time but also during sleep.
K: Do you want me to go into it? This is the last question.
The questioner says: at your second talk, do you remember, I
don't, at your second talk you said: there is an awareness when you
are asleep as well as there is an awareness when you are awake.
You didn't go further into it - is that it sir? You understand the
question? That is, during the day one is aware superficially or
deeply, aware, aware of everything that is going on inwardly, all
the movements of thought, the division, the conflict, the misery,
the loneliness, the awareness of one's demand for pleasure, the

pursuit of ambition, greeds, anxiety, you know the whole of that aware. When you are so aware during the day, does that awareness
continue during the night in the form of dreams? That's right sir?
Or there are no dreams but only an awareness. Right.
Now am I during the day - please listen to this - am I, are you,
aware during the day of every movement of thought? You are not,
are you? Be honest, be simple. You are not. You are aware in
patches. I am aware for two minutes, and then a great blank, and
then again a few minutes later, or half an hour later, I say, "By
Jove, I have forgotten myself" and pick it up again. There are gaps
in our awareness. We are never aware continuously, and we think
we have to be aware continuously, all the time.
Now first of all, there are great spaces between awareness aren't there? Awareness, then unawareness, then awareness and so
on during the day. Which is important? Please, which is important
- the awareness for a few minutes and the non-awareness and the
awareness, and the continuity of awareness? Which is important to be continuously aware; or be aware for short periods; and what
to do with the long periods when you are not aware? Amongst
those three, what is important? What do you think is important? I
know for me what is important. I am not bothered about being
aware for a short period, or wanting to have awareness
continuously. I am only concerned when I am not aware. Do you
understand? That is my question. You understand? When I am
inattentive, I say, I am very interested, not when I am aware, but
why am I inattentive and what am I to do about that inattention, the
unawareness? That is my problem. Not to have constant awareness
- you know - you would go cuckoo unless you have really gone

into this very, very deeply. So my concern is: why am I inattentive
and what happens in that period of inattention? That's my question.
You understand? I know what happens when I am aware. When I
am aware - you know - nothing happens. I am alive, moving,
living, vital, in that nothing can happen because there is no choice
for something to happen. Now when I am inattentive, not aware,
then things happen. Then I say things that are not true, then I am
nervous, I am - you know - anxious, caught, I fall back into my
despair. So why does this happen? You are getting my point? Is
that what you are doing? Or are you concerned with being totally
aware all the time? And trying, practising to be aware all the time?
I don't know, it's up to you.
Now I see I am not aware and I am going to watch what
happens in that state when I am not aware. Now to be aware that I
am not aware is awareness. No don't laugh, do please do listen to
this. It is not a matter of laughter. I know when I am aware. When
there is an awareness it is something entirely different. And I know
when I am not aware, I get nervous, I twitch my hands - you know,
do all kinds of stupid things. When there is an attention in that
unawareness the whole thing is over - you are following what I am
saying? At that moment of unawareness I am aware that I am not
aware, then it is finished. Have you got it? Because then I don't
have to struggle, to say well I must be aware all the time, please
tell me a method to be aware, please practise - you know - tighten,
tighten, become more and more stupid. But when there is no
awareness and I know I am not aware then you see the whole
movement changes.
Now what happens during sleep? Is there an awareness when

you are asleep as you are aware during the day time? If you are
aware during the day time in patches, then that continues while you
are asleep, obviously. But when you are aware, and also aware that
you are inattentive, a totally different movement takes place. Then
when you sleep there is an awareness of complete quietness. The
mind is aware of itself. I won't go into all this because it is not a
mystery. It is not something that is extraordinary, have incense.
You see the mind when it is aware during the day, deeply, that
awareness in depth brings about a quality of mind during sleep
when it is absolutely quiet because during the day you have
observed, you have been aware, either in patches or aware of your
inattention, then as you go through the day, and when you sleep the
activity of the brain has established order during the day. And the
brain demands order, whether that order is in some neurotic belief
or in nationalism, or in this or that, in that it finds order, which
inevitably brings about disorder. But when you are aware during
the day and aware of your unawareness, then at the end of the day
there is an order. Then the brain does not have to struggle during
the night to bring about order. Therefore the brain becomes rested.
It is quiet. And therefore the brain next morning is extraordinarily
alive, not a dead, corrupt drugged thing. Right sirs.

SAANEN 1ST PUBLIC DIALOGUE 4TH
AUGUST, 1971
If we could during these seven mornings take one problem and
work that problem out each morning, go into it completely,
thoroughly, deeply so that we really understand it. This is really a
dialogue, a conversation between you and the speaker, between us.
A friendly conversation in which we can together go into a
problem in detail and in depth and see if we cannot resolve that
problem, any problem that we take, every morning - whether it is
personal or impersonal it is the same. Because if we can discuss a
problem quite impersonally, objectively, then in the very talking
over together the personal element will come in. And a dialogue is
different from a discussion, or from dialectical argument, opinion,
seeking truth through opinion, which is dialectic, or discussion,
which is through reason, through logic, through argument and that
will not lead us very far. But if we could talk over together,
converse, on any particular problem you wish and during this
morning take one problem and go into it completely, not deviate
from it, and go into it step by step, in detail, hesitatingly, not
offering an opinion because then we go off, your opinion against
somebody else's, your argument against somebody else, but in
conversing not indulge in ideologies, opinions, or quote others, but
take a problem that is vital to each one of us and work it out
together. That would be worthwhile, I feel, shall we do that?
Right?
Then what would you like this morning, and the seven mornings
- one problem after another right through? And I believe we are

going to have two discussions, or dialogues with young people, it
comes to the same thing, more or less. So we have seven mornings
and seven problems we are going to take and discuss and go into
completely. Please bear in mind, not deviate from them, if you start
one problem stick to that, and not bring in death and something
else. If you want to discuss death we will go into it. Please, I know
you all want to ask questions - wait, wait, wait, patience! And
don't, if I may suggest, take a problem which you don't feel
strongly about, which doesn't touch your heart.
Now what shall we take this morning for the first time?
Q: Sir.
K: My lord! What is it madame?
Q: Order.
K: The lady would like to discuss order.
Q: I find that in spite of all you said in your second talk I am
still left with my own inner emptiness.
K: Though I have listened to the seven talks I still feel at the
end of it an inner desolation, inner emptiness, inner insufficiency,
and I seem to escape from it. Is that it?
Yes sir?
Q: I wonder if the method we use together really makes it
possible for us to make a radical and drastic transformation?
Because the method we use is on the conscious level and the forces
which bind us probably are on the conscious level whether we
really ignore them, or we want to ignore them. So how can this
matter be liberated from the unconscious?
K: How can this dialogue or conversation liberate the
unconscious motives and problems and things that bind us rather

than talk over the superficial things? How can one release the
unconscious conditioning?
Q: Do you think that real love is possible between man and
wife. I mean real love in freedom without sexual or other greeds,
without pleasure and so on. Do you know if this love is possible?
K: Now! The gentleman asks: can there be real love between
husband and wife or man and woman without the pleasure of
sexuality and all the complications that arise in that relationship
between man and woman. And could we go into the question of
what love is in relationship between man and woman. Right sir?
Now which of these shall we take? Which of these shall we
take? Order, or unconscious release, releasing the unconscious
because... Yes sir?
Q: That is the same thing to be considered in sex.
K: Yes, slowly. I am trying to take them. Order, release of the
unconscious, awareness.
Q: May I ask a question?
K: No sir, just a minute. Just a minute. Awareness, love
between man and woman, to look at life as a whole, totally,
completely. That's enough. And inner insufficiency. You
understand? Order, release of the unconscious, inner insufficiency,
to look at the total whole movement of life as one, nonfragmentally and what is love, can it exist between man and
woman when there is sexual pleasure, complications and all the
rest of it?
Now which of these shall we take this morning? Wait. Which of
these shall we take this morning and go into it completely,
thoroughly so that when you and I leave this tent we have got it,

that we have really understood it.
Audience: The last question. Order. You decide.
K: I decide. No, sorry. I am not the chairman. It is proposed,
many people want: what is relationship between man and woman,
is it based on sexual pleasure and when there is that pleasure can
there be love, order? And the release of the unconscious,
insufficiency, seeing the totality of life as a whole, not man,
woman, order, unconsciousness, insufficiency but seeing the whole
of this. What do you say?
Q: I see that all these subjects are so interrelated, so why not
take order, that would embody everything.
K: As each problem is interrelated, why not take one problem,
such as order, and perhaps that could cover many of the questions
that have been raised this morning.
Q: Have you not already talked about order?
K: We have already talked about order, the lady says, so why
the dickens begin all over again!
Q: What about awareness, sir? It covers everything.
K: Could we consider, is it possible to see the whole movement
of life totally and not fragmentarily. Order, insufficiency,
awareness, relationship with the man and the woman, all that. Can
we take this thing. That is, how to look at life as a whole
movement, not as a fragmentary movement? Would that cover
this?
A: Yes.
Q: One question would cover all that but would it cover the
unknown?
K: I think it would. We will bring it in. The questioner says:

would the unconscious be covered when we discuss the whole total
process of life? I said I thought it would. So can we take that up?
Right.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Do you consider, or do you look at the world as being good
and evil. A particular evil and a particular good. Of course, good,
bad, all that, you know.
Q: I think the world is good.
K: According to the rules of god, good, and evil is against god.
Now let us enquire.
Q: Not many thousand gods but one god.
K: Not many thousand gods but one god. We'll go into that.
How do you consider, how do you look at life? Do we look at it
fragmentarily as good and bad, as the will of god and so on, or do
you take life, which is immense - you follow? - in which is
involved love, awareness, beauty, death, strife, misery, conflict, old
age, disease, altogether? Or look at it in fragments, as the physical,
the emotional - you know - love and intellect? How do you
consider life?
Q: Altogether.
K: Wait, wait madame. Now how do you consider it? How do
you look at life actually, don't let us pretend, don't let us become
theoretical or hypothetical and thereby slightly dishonest. We must
take it as we are. How do you look at life without any
fragmentation, or do you look at life in fragments - business, the
artist, the scientist, the philosopher, the religious man, the woman,
the man, love, you follow, all broken up. And is it possible at all to
look at this whole movement as a unitary process? And can I,

please just listen, can I, who have been educated, brought up in a
certain culture which conditions me to look at god and the devil,
the physical and the escape from the physical - you follow? - do I,
being conditioned, consciously or unconsciously, consider this
whole movement of life broken up? And when you do break it up the business man, the religious man, the artist, the hippie, you
know - divide it - then out of that is disorder. Right? Now how do
you actually consider it, look at life?
Q: By love. I don't want them to be hippies because (inaudible)
K: No, madame. Now please just listen. You have understood
my question sirs? How do you regard it sirs?
Q: In most of the discussions I have heard you start with an
assumption - well not an assumption - but you start with a premise
- it is order. Where do you go from there?
K: I don't posit order. On the contrary I start with the disorder.
We are in disorder. That is clear. We are in disorder, there is war,
there are the hippies, the division of nationalities, there is man and
woman fighting each other, sexually, we are at war with each other
in ourselves, that is disorder. That is a fact. It would be absurd to
posit order, there is no order.
Q: Is there not order in natural life?
K: Is there not order in natural life? Probably there is, in nature.
But that is not my question, please don't let's go back. Our question
is: can you and I look at this whole phenomenon of existence as
one unitary movement, not broken up as the conscious or the
unconscious.
Q: But that would be order.
K: Sir we are discussing that. I don't know where it is going to

lead us. We are trying to find out through conversation whether our
minds are capable of looking at life as a whole, as one unitary
movement and therefore no contradiction.
Q: But isn't it the definition of the unconscious that I am unable
to look at it?
K: I want to go into it. Please. We must go slowly into this. All
right. I cannot look at life as one unitary movement - suppose I
cannot - for me personally it is something - I look at it quite
differently, not with division.
Now suppose I cannot look at life as a whole. Am I aware that I
look at life fragmentarily. Let us begin with that. Are you aware,
conscious, know, that you divide life as the scientist, the
philosopher, the religious man, the god, the good, the devil, the
man, the woman, unconscious, conscious - you know, divide, the
hippie, the non-hippie.
Q: No.
K: The gentleman says, no.
Q: Is not life as a whole an abstract concept?
K: Is not life as a whole an abstract concept. If we posit life as a
unitary process, as an idea then it is a concept. But if we realize
that we live in fragments and whether that fragmentary division
can be changed, then we will find out the other.
Q: It appears to me that I have to become what I am first, find
out what I am before I can begin to change.
K: Before I begin to change I must know what I am.
Q: All those hippies, that's it, I don't like hippies and that's what
I am. I can possibly change it if I first become what I am.
K: Therefore I must become what I am. Look sir, we are not

talking about change. We are trying to consider this morning, this
question: how do I consider life?
Q: If I am fragmented I can't see the whole.
K: That's it. If I am fragmented I can't see life as a whole. Are
we fragmented? Let's begin with that. Are we fragmented?
Q: Sir, maybe fragmentation is not at the conscious level, like
you said, an artist, a scientist, a priest. This fragmentation is in the
unconscious.
K: I am coming to that sir. I am coming.
Q: I find it impossible to give the answers you want.
K: It is not what I want sir.
Q: I know you are coming to something.
K: I don't know what I am coming to. Forgive me. I said this
morning, we are going to talk over together a particular problem.
And altogether we said, let us talk over together this question of
fragmentation and the unity of life. And I said we don't know what
the unity of life is, there may be, but let us consider whether each
one of us looks at life in fragments, not only at the conscious level
but also at the deep unconscious level. So you may not, the
gentleman pointed out, consider the superficial fragmentation, the
Hindu, the Buddhist, the Muslim, the Christian and so on - the
Communist, the hippie, the non-hippie and all that - superficially
you may discard all that because you may say, well I have listened
to you for umpteen years and I am out of that. But deep down we
may still live in a world of fragmentation. That is what we have
come to now. You understand? That is, after observing
intelligently, seeing what the facts are outwardly - wars, division of
nationalities, division of religions and subdivision of religions all

over the world, there is the guru, the follower, all that is involved superficially observing all this, you say, how stupid all that is. And
you may by observing reject the superficiality of it, but inwardly,
deeply, you may live in fragments. Now let us stick to that. You
understand? Shall we go on from there?
A: Yes.
K: Thank the lord!
First of all be quite sure, absolutely sure, that you have
discarded the superficial. That you are no longer caught in the
various religious fragmentary approaches to life - the Hindu, the
Buddhist, the Christian, and the divisions in the Christians, the
Baptists, Methodists - you know. And also nationalities. You are
quite sure you have discarded all that completely. It is one of the
most difficult things to do - but it doesn't matter. Let's go deeper.
Q: If these divisions do exist, to discard them - isn't that a
fragmentation itself.
K: Ah! Isn't that a fragmentation itself to superficially discard.
Discard at the conscious level, and that very discarding is it not
also fragmentary. We'll come to that. By going into the
unconscious and seeing how fragmentary it is there, we will
naturally then come upon the other. Then we will come together
because we have divided life as conscious and the unconscious, the
hidden and the open. That is the whole psychoanalytical,
psychological point of view. To me that doesn't exist personally conscious and unconscious - finished. But apparently for most of
us there is this division. And now we are going together to talk
over whether we are deep down conditioned in fragmentation.
Right, is that clear? Now how are you going to examine the

unconscious? It is what you have said, not what I have said. You
have said there is this division between the conscious and the
unconscious - slowly sir - and one may be superficially free of the
divisions that culture has brought about. Culture - Christian, Hindu,
whatever it is, the Atman and all the rest of it. How are you going
to examine the unconscious with all its fragmentation?
Q: Sir, hadn't we better find out whether there is conscious and
unconscious, then we would examine that they don't exist.
K: So the gentleman says, why do you examine one of the
divisions, conscious and unconscious. He says it is not. The
definition, apparently, of the unconscious is: it is what we want to
know about. We think we know about the conscious, we think we
know superficially what conscious, superficial consciousness is.
But we don't know what the unconscious is. But the gentleman
says - just listen to what he says - he says we have divided this but
is that a fact. Or is it a means of investigating this unconscious?
Right. Now. Let's begin. There is conscious and the
unconscious. I don't say the division exists. That's what we have
taken. I look at it personally entirely differently, which I'll come to
later. Now do I know, do you know your conscious mind - what
you think, how you think, why you think, consciously what you are
doing and what you are not doing? And you think you understand
the conscious. You think but you may not really actually
understand it. Which is the fact? Which is the fact, now I am
asking you: do you know the conscious very well?
Q: No. We only state opinions.
K: We are not taking opinions. No, madame. Listen. We are not
indulging in opinions. We are not quoting some psychologist. We

are looking at ourselves without any prejudice, without any
previous concept, we are just looking. Therefore I am asking: am I
looking at my conscious mind and do I know the content of that,
the conscious mind?
Q: Isn't our conscious mind going towards what we understand?
K: Is conscious mind, the definition of the conscious mind, is it
not, what we understand. You may understand one thing, and you
may not understand the other. You may understand one part of the
content of the conscious and the other part you may not know
anything about at all. So do you know the content of your
conscious mind? Conscious mind?
Q: If we knew this content there wouldn't be this chaos in the
world.
K: Of course sir, naturally.
Q: But we don't know it.
K: That's my point. We think we know it. We think we know
the operations of the conscious mind because there is a habit set
about - go to the office, go, do this, do that - you follow? And I
think I understand the content of the superficial mind. But I
question it. And I also question very much whether the
unconscious can ever be investigated by the conscious. You follow
sir? If I don't know the conscious mind, its content, how can I
examine the unconscious with its content? Right? Right sir? So
there must be a different approach to the thing altogether. You
understand sirs?
Q: The unconscious - how do we know it exists?
K: How do we know the unconscious exists.
Q: By its manifestation.

K: You say, by its manifestation. That is, consciously you may
be doing something, unconsciously the motive is to frighten - you
follow - the motive may be entirely different from the conscious
urge.
Q: Negative action.
K: Of course. So - you follow what I am trying to say? Please
let us try to understand each other. If the content of the conscious
cannot be known completely, how can that consciousness which is
superficial, which doesn't know itself completely, examine the
unconscious with all its content, which is hidden? And you have
only one means of examination, now. Which is: to look at the
unconscious consciously. Go slowly, please. Please see the
importance of this. This is fun.
Q: Isn't it true that for any inward conscious manifestation there
is also a parallel outward manifestation?
K: Obviously sir. Sir, can we put it this way? Do I know the
content of my consciousness? Know, aware, understand, have I
observed without any prejudice, without any kind of formula,
prejudice, have I observed the content of my consciousness,
superficial, hidden?
Q: I think the problem is deeper. What you know, what you are
aware of, that you are conscious of; everything you are not aware
about, you don't know, that is your unconscious.
K: That is what he has said sir. I understand sir, that is what he
said, just now. You are saying, what I know I am aware of is
conscious. What I am not aware of is the unconscious.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: But do I know, please give a few minutes thought to what

somebody else says, what somebody else is saying now is me, so
please give it two minutes thought. Which is: if I don't know the
content of my consciousness, superficial, can that consciousness
which is not complete in its understanding of its own superficiality,
can that conscious mind examine the unconscious? That is what we
are doing now, aren't we? We are trying to observe the unconscious
consciously. No?
Q: Impossible.
K: You can't do it.
Q: We don't know.
K: We don't know.
Q: There is no frontier between consciousness and
unconsciousness.
K: Therefore what will you do sir? Don't indulge in theories.
Look: I have been brought from about nine years or eight years, in
a highly traditional Brahmanical background, of which tradition you know nothing about it - it is ruthless. From morning until night
you are told what to do, what not to do, what to think, don't hurt,
you are a Brahmin don't touch a non-Brahmin - you have no idea.
From the moment you are born until like myself, nine or eight, you
are conditioned in a tremendous tradition. Consciously it is being
done, every day by the temple, by the mother, by the father, by the
environment, by the culture - it is tremendously heavy. You are
brought up there. Now wait, go slowly. And you move to another
conditioning. And again to another conditioning. College, student you follow? Condition after condition. All these are laid upon you,
by society, by culture, by the civilization, by accident, by intention,
all this is laid, one after the other. Now how are you going to

divide this and that? They are all interrelated. Right? I may reject
the Brahmanical tradition very quickly, or may not, or I may think
I have done it but still caught in it. How am I to understand this
whole content?
Q: I am that content.
K: Therefore what does that mean? Of course, consciousness is
its content. Right? Please see that. My consciousness is made up of
the Brahmanical tradition, the philosophical, theosophical, the
world teacher, all that, the content of all this consciousness is that.
Consciousness is its content. Right? Consciousness is its content.
Now can I look at this whole content as one, or do I have to look at
it fragmentarily? Wait sir - see the difficulty first. Or is the content
so deep, of which I don't know? Or I can only know the superficial
content for ever? That is my problem. That is your problem. Right?
How am I to uncondition the mind, which has such content?
Q: May I ask one little thing?
K: Yes, sir.
Q: You said for instance that you were taking the example of
the Brahmanical tradition. This is still a fragmentary tradition but
you had a relationship with a father or with a mother or somebody
who protected you with love or god knows what.
K: Yes, yes. But you see...
Q: Sir, let's stick to the point. The point was made clear. Can we
stick to that?
K: I am sticking to it sir. I won't budge from it.
Q: If you ask how do I uncondition the mind, or how do I
uncondition me? I would say: how do I change?
K: It is the same thing, sir.

Q: For instance, I believe that first you must become what you
are.
K: What am I. You keep on repeating that sir. You said first I
must become what I am. What are you? You are all that
conditioning.
Q: Right.
K: And if you say first I must become all that, know all that
conditioning, that is what I am saying. Are you aware of all your
conditioning, which you want to be, which you are? Before we
change, or talk about change, first am I aware of my conditioning?
Not only superficially but the deep, deep layers: as the gentleman
pointed out I may be caught in a Christian, Communist,
Brahmanical tradition but I have lived with a family, the mother
may have been brutal, nervous - but fortunately in the family in
which this person grew up there were thirteen children and nobody
cared.
Q: Sir, I have the feeling that I am unconditioning myself by
listening to you.
K: That's it sir. Just listen. That is what I want to get at. For
god's sake move, let's move.
Q: The content of consciousness.
Q: I am nothing.
K: No, no, no, madame. That is speculation. Just let us follow
this please. I am all my content. The content is my consciousness.
The content is experience, knowledge, the tradition, the
upbringing, the nervous father, the brutal mother, or the nagging
mother - you follow all that has been the content which is me. Now
am I aware of this content? Don't shrug your shoulders and say, I

don't know, otherwise you can't move forwards. If you are not - I
am afraid you are not, if I may point out - then how do we
proceed?
Q: Sir the mind is aware that it is conditioned. It sees the
conditioning.
K: I understand sir. Look. I can see part of my conditioning.
You follow sir? I can see I am conditioned as a Communist or a
Muslim, but there are other parts to this. Now can I investigate
consciously the various fragments which compose the 'me', the
content of my consciousness? Can I consciously look at all this?
Q: But we are not separate from it.
K: I understand that. I understand that. How am I to look at the
various contents of my consciousness? Or is that a totally wrong
process?
Q: It must be.
K: You are going to find out, don't say, it must be.
Q: I don't see how one can. It seems that if one can hold oneself
to what one is seeing in the foreground, and without judgement and
without a preconceived look as to how one should look at it, then
one begins to see even the subconscious because...
K: I understand madame. That is fairly clear what you are
saying. The lady says: if I can hold what I see without judgement,
without evaluation, then that very perception without any
judgement reveals not only the unconscious, the whole movement.
Now just a minute. My question you have not yet answered. My
question is, I am asking you: can you look at the content of your
consciousness - you being part of that content? If you cannot know
the content of your consciousness how can you say that I am right

or that I am wrong? I loathe this or that. This is good, or that is
bad. The hippies are nice, the hippies are not nice. You are not in
such a position to judge at all. So can you know the content of your
own consciousness?
Q: I know right at this moment, but I am aware of you, I am
ecstatic with what you are doing. You can show me that I am right
with you. I don't fully understand this in the sense of your
questions. I find I am excited, by heart is beating, I want to get into
more of what you are talking about. I am aware of the seat I am
sitting on, that I am shaking. I can see my consciousness at this
moment.
K: No.
Q: Sir, one is aware of the conditioning, that is the important
thing surely. That is the experiencing.
K: First of all sir, let me hold a minute. May I go on a little bit?
Does one realize our consciousness is its content - do you
understand my statement? The content makes up consciousness. So
consciousness is not separate from its content. Is that absolutely
clear? The content and consciousness are not separate. The content
is consciousness. Right? Now what do you do then?
Q: Look at the contents.
K: Listen to it sir. What do you do then? There is a fact. The
fact is the content makes up your consciousness. The content being
a Communist, Socialist, a Christian, a Buddhist - you follow,
whatever it isthe father, the mother, the pressures of civilization,
the culture - all that is the content. And do you say, yes, that is a
fact? Begin with that. That is a fact, irrefutable fact. If you are born
in India, in a family which is Brahmanical you will be conditioned

to that. And if you are born in a family of Catholics, you will be
Catholics. So the content is consciousness. Right. Keep to that. I
realize that. Then what do I do?
Q: I see that the usual process of my trying to act on what I see
is in itself a fragmentation and when that is seen clearly I stop
acting on what I see.
K: No, you are missing my point sir. If you will forgive me for
a minute.
Q: You cannot do anything.
K: Wait, wait. Hold a minute. Don't move from there.
Q: This word order is the content of my consciousness.
K: That's just it. The word order or disorder is the content of my
consciousness which is in disorder. Therefore I said I am the
world, the world is me. Right? The 'me' is the content of all the
parts made up, as the world is. Right? Now that is a fact. Now just
listen.
The fact is the content of my consciousness is consciousness.
Now how do I proceed from there? Please do listen for two
minutes. How do I proceed to unravel, take out piece by piece the
various contents, examine them, throw out, keep, and who is the
entity that is examining? The entity which is separate that is
examining, is part of my consciousness, which is the result of the
culture in which I have been brought up, saying you are different
from what you see, you are a Brahmin, therefore you must
approach life from a particular traditional idea. And that is so. One
fact: the content of consciousness is consciousness. Then the
second fact: if there is an entity which examines its fragmentation
of that content, then that examiner is part of the content. And that

examiner has separated himself from the content for various
psychological reasons of security, safety, protection and also it is
part of the culture. So that is the second fact. So the first fact is:
that if I examine I am playing a trick. Right? I am deceiving
myself. Do you see this?
Q: Yes.
K: Let me go on, don't please say yes.
Fact one is, content. Fact two is, the division as the examiner, as
the observer, separating himself from the content, analysing it and
putting away or keeping. All that is the result of the content also.
And the third factor is: do I see this very clearly? If I do then what
is then action? You are following? I am faced with this problem. I
am conditioned, tremendously, and part of this conditioning is the
desire to be secure. A child needs to be secure. The brain needs to
be completely secure so as to function healthily. But that brain
wants to be secure and it may find security in some neurotic belief,
in some neurotic action, there is its security. So it has found
security in tradition and holds on to it. And it has found security in
this division as the observer and the observed, because that is part
of the tradition. Because if I reject the observer I am lost! So I am
now faced with the fact that the content, division, as the observer
and the observed, and whatever movement I do is part of the
content. Right? Are you clear on this? Then what is there to be
done? We are not discussing conscious or unconscious because it is
part of this. We say the conscious mind observes at a certain level,
there are deeper motives, deeper intentions, deeper vitalities. And
the whole of that is the content of my consciousness, which is the
world consciousness. Right sir?

So what am I to do? My mind realizes that it must be free from
conditioning. I must be free from being a Hindu, otherwise I am a
slave to that, otherwise there will be wars, there will be
antagonism, there will be division. So the mind says at any price
being intelligent it must uncondition itself. Now how is this to be
done? Without - bear in mind - without the division as the analyser
and the analysed, knowing the content is consciousness, any effort
I make is still part of that content, to get out of it. Right? Have you
understood? Then what is one to do, faced with this?
Q: Either accept the world as it is, or totally reject it.
K: Wait. We are going to come to that. Now when you say
reject it...
Q: I mean we can't accept it as it is.
K: Who are you to accept it? Why should you accept it, or reject
it? It is a fact. There is the sun, why do you accept it or reject it? It
is there. Right? So - wait, let me finish. You are faced with this and
if you reject it who is the person who is to reject it? The person is
part of that consciousness, he is rejecting only a part that doesn't
suit him. Right? And if he accepts it he will accept the part that
suits him.
Q: To go back to what you said before about the sequence of the
neurotic pattern. I don't know it.
K: That's why. I am going to show you something sir.
Q: How can I reject it?
K: You can't reject anything. There it is. Now what is the action
that takes place when you observe you can't do anything? Wait.
Q: To start with you might feel that all this consciousness is not
really it and you might be a monkey. And getting the feeling that

you are this, you stop but the process goes on when you can't help
it.
K: No sir. No sir. The process goes on only when I have not
understood the content of my consciousness, whether it is neurotic
or not neurotic, whether it is homosexual or not homosexual,
whether it is heterosexual - you follow, the content, all that is
implied in that. And if I choose one part and hold on to it that is the
very essence of neuroticism. If I say I am a Hindu and hold on to it,
and I am also technologically most advanced - I become a first
class engineer and inwardly I am a beastly little Brahmin. You
follow? And so on and so on.
So any action on my part - please listen to this - any action on
my part, which is part of the content, it cannot be unconditioned
that way: then what am I to do? You have got it sir? I will not
reject or accept it. It is a fact.
Q: You can't do anything. Everything you do only strengthens
the division.
K: Therefore, what do you do?
Q: You can't do anything.
K: Wait, wait. You are too quick! Then you don't know what it
means not to do a thing. Just a minute sir. Listen.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: No, no. I don't know what Freud says, I am not interested in
what Freud says.
Q: I am.
K: You are interested in what Freud says - why?
Q: Because it is a fact. It is deep in the nature.
K: Wait a minute sir. Are you quoting Freud, or have you

observed yourself? Therefore it is your own experience and you
say the unconscious pops up, and acts. Or the unconscious prevents
action. So you are still thinking in terms of division - of course.
The conscious and the unconscious. I am not thinking in those
terms at all. I refuse to think in division.
Q: But there isn't really a division.
K: But to you still the unconscious pops up.
Q: It's a word, like will or...
K: Oh no, no. When we use the word unconscious you are
already using it with a definite meaning that it is not conscious.
Therefore there is consciousness and the thing which is not
conscious. To me that is a statement of fragmentation. So if you
know that you are fragmented that way, why do you hold on to it?
Q: Our contents work.
K: Of course it works. Of course. I say I am heterosexual,
probably deeply I am the other. I am always contradicting myself
and becoming a hypocrite, a dreadful entity.
So I am saying all this is part of my consciousness - Freud and
holding on to Freud, holding on to not Freud, to my Brahmanical
tremendous tradition, which is the same, disliking the hippies and
liking the squares, it is the same. So I am saying to you, the whole
of my content is my consciousness. I will not use one part against
the other, hold on to one part because that pleases me, or that I am
conditioned that way.
Q: But when you say the religious mind, you talk about that.
K: I am afraid I do.
Q: You also make a division between...
K: Ah, no, no. I say when there is no division of any kind, it

makes it very clear, when there is no division of any kind, not only
superficially but in the content of consciousness itself as the
observer and the observed, when there is nothing of that, then there
is the quality of the religious mind. So we won't go into that.
Now please just listen. You see. Please, when we say the
content makes up consciousness, Freudian philosophy, your
particular experience, everything is included in that, everything.
Right? The poor man in India has never heard of Freud, he has
never heard of Christ. And the man who has been brought up for
two centuries with the mythology of Christ, he says that is a fact,
and the poor little villager with his little god, he says that is a fact.
Both are the content of consciousness. Surely sir?
Q: It's not clear.
K: You see you refuse to let go your particular fragment to
which you are holding. This is what I have - when I go to India - I
have to fight this, because they believe most fundamentally, for
centuries they have been brought up in the idea that there is an
Atman and Brahman, which is the Atman and Brahman god. And it
is only possible when these two come together. And I say it is
sheer nonsense. One is invented, both are invented by thought.
That is my game with them. So don't enter it!
K: So I say to myself...
Q: You aren't denying the word I, it is just an identification.
K: I am just using it as a means of communication. Let's cut it
out. Now I have come to this point. I see for myself any movement
within that content is still part of the content, any movement. If I
say, this is good, and hold on to it, that is part of it - if I say that is
bad, or if I say there is god or no god, it is still. So what am I to do

knowing the mind is conditioned that way - know it - I know it
completely - it is as clear as that sunshine - if there is sunshine.
And that is an absolute fact. Then I say to myself: now how is the
mind to free itself from its conditioning?
Q: I believe that you will have to go beyond the conditioning.
K: No, no. To go beyond means still part of it.
Q: But you can go beyond yourself when you are listening.
K: Yes sir, quite right. Quite right.
Q: But because I feel that you have lost your conditioning, I am
going to listen to you, actually listen so that iI lose my
conditioning.
K: I understand sir. You don't know me and please sir don't say,
you are unconditioned, you don't know what it means so please
don't judge.
Q: Sir, what has happened is that we don't want to get rid of our
conditioning.
K: Keep it! Keep it and live with it. Be in turmoil, be in misery you follow - wars. Don't move out of it. If you like it hold to it and
that is what is happening sir. Do you follow? The Muslim holds on
to his conditioning and that is why he is fighting the Israelis. And
the Israelis hold on to theirs. Right? And that is the world. And I
have my particular anchor, I won't let go. So knowing all this, what
is the mind to do?
Q: I become quiet. I don't do anything.
K: The gentleman says, I become quiet - you follow the
statement? When I am faced with this fact that I am wholly
conditioned, I can play tricks upon myself and say I am
unconditioning myself, which is part of my training, which is part

of the content. You follow? He says, I become silent. Is that so?
Q: I can't help bringing in the I.
K: That's just it. He means really that it is just a means of
saying. Now what happens sir, do look at it, when you are faced
with something about which you can't do a thing - you understand you have thought by your conditions that you could do something right - that you could change, that you could manipulate, that you
could alter this but it is still part of the same field, moving from
one stone to another, one corner to another corner of the field, it is
still within that field, when you realize that any movement within
that field is conditioning movement - what takes place? Just don't
answer me. What takes place? Sir, what takes place when the Arab
and the Israelis say, look, I am conditioned, you are conditioned,
what takes place? Go on sir, what takes place?
Q: Then it is possible to live.
K: Then it is possible to live. If I realize I am totally
conditioned, and any tricks I can play upon myself is part of my
conditioning - from being a Catholic becoming a Hindu, from a
Hindu to Communism, from Communism to Maoism, from
Maoism rush back to Zen, and from Zen to Krishnamurti and so on
and so on, it is part of my conditioning, it is part of this whole
content. What happens when I realize this?
Q: This process stops itself. It falls down.
K: Has it fallen with you sir? Don't theorize for god's sake.
Q: It is a fact. It falls down by itself.
K: Sir it is much more complex than that. You are too quick.
You are not going with it. You want a result.
Q: Sir the mind that sees this is not the same mind that started

the enquiry.
K: That's it. Now what has taken place? Go slowly sir. What has
taken place to a mind that started enquiring into its content and
discovering the extraordinary divisions, the contradictions, the
fragmentation, the assertions, the aggression, you follow,
discovered all that, what happens to such a mind?
Q: It becomes very clear. It has space. It is in another state.
K: Then sir, I will put you a different question. What is your
action in daily life - listen to this - what is your action in daily life,
not just action of a crisis, your daily life when you realize this fact?
Q: You take decisions.
K: You haven't even listened to my question. How can you say
you take decisions.
Q: Maybe we don't realize this sir.
K: That's my point sir. Either you realize this as a fact, and that
fact fundamentally changes the whole structure of your...
Q: ...life.
K: Wait. Or you don't realize it. If you don't realize it - you
follow, as apparently you don't, you merely say, yes, I understand
it, which means nothing - when you are confronted with this fact,
what is your action in daily life - relate it to the two, then you will
get the answer. Do you understand? Do you understand sir? That is
- wait, listen to me - I realize that I am a Hindu, conditioned. I
realize that I have been brought up in peculiar circumstances world teacher, all - you have no idea of it, the whole devotion,
candles, worship, all that, facing the world, property, money,
position, prestige, and I see all that is part of the content, part of
me. And what is the relationship of that perception to my daily

life? Unless I relate it, it remains verbal, theoretical, nonsensical.
So I must relate it. So I am saying: what is my relationship when I
realize the conditioning, what is my action in daily life, knowing
that? If you can't answer it, then you have not realized it, then you
are playing with words.
Q: It appears to me that every time you ask a question, there is a
problem of everyone trying to find the answer. In the question, if it
is real there is no answer.
K: Of course not sir. I am asking it because you have to ask that
question.
Q: That's right. It's the person who asks the question always
looks for the answer.
K: That is what I am saying. I realize - I won't use I. There is
the realization of this conditioning, how does that realization act in
daily life?
Q: There is no reaction.
K: Madame, don't say anything. Put that question to yourself
first, I am not asking you, to answer it, put it to yourself. Then how
does the realization of this absolute fact, whether you are attached
to neuroticism or to some other neuroticism, when you realize all
this what does that realization do to your daily activities?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: You are going to find out. If there is a division between - see
what he has said just now - if there is a division between that
realization and your daily action, if there is a division, then there is
conflict. That conflict is disorder in which we live, both the world
and you and another. So what takes place when there is a real
perception of this, the truth of it. When you really see the truth like

fire burns, tiger hurts, poison kills you, when you realize that fact
as vitality as that, then what is your action in that realization in
your daily life. Put that question - you know.
Q: This realization gives me awareness in daily life - is that the
quality?
K: Oh no madame. Don't, it is nothing of that.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Find out sir. Of course it does.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: No sirs, please sirs. I am asking you which is: do you realize
- I am not being patronizing or insulting, I am just asking you - do
you realize in the sense you have a pain, when you have a tooth
that hurts, there is pain, that is an absolute realization of pain, you
do something about it. You don't say, well I'll theorize about it you follow - you go to the nearest drug store, or chemist, or go to
the dentist, there is action. In the same way when the mind realizes
totally that you are conditioned, the content of your consciousness
is its content - go slowly - and any movement that you do is still
part of that consciousness - try to get out of it, or accept it, or reject
it, it is still part of it - then what is the realization of the truth of
that, how does it affect your life? You can't answer it because I'll
show you why. The realization of that fact is going to act. You
understand? The realization, the truth of that fact is going to act,
and that truth being so highly intelligent will act according to the
moment.
Q: But can you realize that? But can you realize that when you
are caught in your fear.
K: You can't, can't. Therefore - we come back to the question -

one fragment which is fear, you are trying to overcome by another
fragment. Right? And that way you cannot get rid of it. Right? So
there must be a different approach to that fragment which you call
fear. Right? And the approach is this: to do absolutely nothing
about fear. Right? Can you? I can't do anything about that train
going by, the noise, therefore I listen to it. You understand? Please
listen to what I am saying. I cannot do a thing about the rattle, the
noise, the roar of that train. Therefore I don't put up a resistance to
it, therefore I listen. When I listen there is no noise. There is noise
but it doesn't affect me. In the same way when I realize I am
neurotic, realize it, I am holding on to a particular belief, a
particular way of action, I am homosexual or whatever it is, that I
have tremendous prejudices, god exists, god doesn't exist. You
follow? When I realize that I am attached to one thing, just to listen
to it, completely with my heart, not resist it, listen to it totally.
Is this clear this discussion, this morning? That is, we started
out by asking, if I can look at the whole movement of life as a
unitary process - the killing, the refugees, seven and a half million
of them in India, which is already poor, tremendous business, the
war in the Middle East, the Catholics, the Protestants, the
scientists, the artists, the businessman, the private life, the public
life, my family, your family - division, division, division. And this
division has brought about such disorder in the world and in
myself, can I look at all this as a marvellous single movement? I
can't? That is a fact. Right? I can't because I am fragmented in
myself. I am conditioned in myself. So my concern then is not to
find out how to live a unitary life but to see if the fragmentation
can come to an end. And that fragmentation comes to an end only

when I realize all my consciousness is made up of these fragments.
My consciousness is the fragmentation. And when I says there
must be integrity, brought together, it is still part of that trick I am
playing upon myself. So I realize that. I realize is as truth as fire
burns. You can't deceive me, it is a fact, and I am left with it. And I
have to find how it operates in my daily life. I have to find it out,
not guess, play, theorize, because I have seen the truth of it that
truth is going to act. If I don't see it and pretend I have seen it then
I am going to make a hideous mess of my life. Right sir.

SAANEN 2ND PUBLIC DIALOGUE 5TH
AUGUST, 1971
K: We were talking over together yesterday the question of the
unconscious, conscious, and the content of consciousness and what
to do about it. Shall we go on with that? Or would you like to
discuss another problem this morning?
Q: Go on with that.
K: You are sure?
Q: Well, I would like to discuss a bit more about intelligence
and thought. The relationship between them and silence and death.
K: Now let us get the question clear. The gentleman is asking:
what is the relationship between intelligence and thought, silence
and death. Do you want to discuss that?
Q: Could we go into the question of freedom. And can freedom
exist in a modern society.
K: I would like to discuss, he says, what is freedom and whether
freedom can exist in a modern society.
Q: I don't really know if we have completely finished with the
question of yesterday and if we really went to the very bottom of it.
K: The questioner says, I don't think we have gone sufficiently
deeply into the question of the motive, the deep down intention and
so on.
I wonder if we cannot discuss this question of consciousness
more deeply by considering what is intelligence and thought, the
relationship between intelligence and thought, and perhaps if we
can then go into silence and its relationship to death. But before we
go into that there are several things involved in what we were

discussing yesterday. And I do not know if you have gone deeply
into it yourself and what you understood, or how much of it is a
reality.
We said yesterday, that most of us are conditioned by the
culture, by the environment, by the food, the clothes, and so on, we
are conditioned. The conditioning is the content of consciousness
and consciousness is the conditioning. What relationship is thought
to that conditioning? And can there be intelligence where there is
conditioning? Right sir?
One is aware if one has sufficiently examined oneself quite
objectively, not with any kind of condemnation or judgement, if
one has observed oneself one realizes one is conditioned,
superficially or in great depth. And is it at all possible not only to
be free of the deep conditioning, which may be the result of the
family, the whole racial accumulation, the influences which have
not been obvious but nevertheless have penetrated very deeply,
whether the mind can ever be free of all that? That is one question.
And if it is conditioned can the mind uncondition itself totally? Or
- this may be a relevant question - can the mind prevent itself, not
through resistance, from being conditioned ever? You follow?
There are these two things which you have to examine this
morning. In relation to thought and intelligence, and what is said
also with regard to silence and death. We'll go into all this, if we
can, we'll cover this whole field.
Why does the mind ever get conditioned? Is it so sensitive, so
capable of being hurt, it is like a tender delicate thing, and in
relationship it gets invariably hurt, invariably conditioned, and can
that conditioning ever possibly be washed away. So one realizes

the mind is conditioned, the brain itself is conditioned - time
evolved through centuries upon centuries, and the brain is the store
house of memory, you can watch it yourself, you don't have to read
philosophical or psychological books, at least I don't, though you
may. And it is always responding, the brain which has evolved
through time, which is the past, which is the accumulation of
memory, experience, knowledge, responds to any challenge
instantly according to its conditioning, superficially or in depth. I
think this is clear.
Now can that response from the past be delayed so that there is
an interval between the challenge and the response? It is not so
difficult, is it? That is, one has been brought up - I am taking a
very, very superficial conditioning - in a particular culture, in a
particular belief or pattern, and when that belief or pattern is
questioned there is instant response according to the background of
the person. I am asking: can that response be delayed so that there
is an interval between the challenge and the response. That is fairly
simple, isn't it, no? You tell me I am a fool - my response is
immediate, calling you another, or getting angry with you, or this
or that. Now when you call me a fool, can there be an interval
between you calling me and my responding, a space - right - so that
the brain is quiet enough to respond in a different way? Am I
making myself clear?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Hold on a minute sir, hold on, one moment. The brain
responds all the time according to its conditioning, according to
various forms of stimuli, it is always active. The brain is the
response of time, memory, it is the content of it. Right? In the brain

the whole past is contained. If the brain can hold itself and not
respond immediately then there is a possibility of a new response.
Right?
Q: But this time itself is responsive.
K: No sir, you are missing my point. Don't pick me up in words,
just look at the meaning for the moment.
The brain operates in the old habits established by the culture I
live in, or by the past racial inheritance and so on, that responds all
the time, judging, evaluating, believing, not believing, discussing,
getting angry, violent, prejudiced, that is its response all the time to
any stimuli, protecting, denying and so on. I am asking myself
whether that brain can momentarily be in abeyance and not
respond instantly? Right? I am asking, I don't know, I am going to
find out. The brain cannot be denied of its past knowledge, it must
have past knowledge - I don't know if you are meeting all this otherwise it can't function. So I am asking myself whether that
brain which is the old, will allow itself to be quiet so that a new
part can operate? Right? When you flatter me the old brain says,
how lovely. But can the old brain listen to what you say, the
flattery, and not respond so that perhaps a new movement can take
place? Right? Right sir? That new movement can only take place
when there is silence, not the machinery operating in terms of the
past. Is that clear? Clear in the sense of watch yourself sir,
otherwise it is no fun. I am not explaining for myself, we are
working together. I find when one examines one's activities, the old
brain is always responding as a Catholic, as a Protestant or
whatever it is, or according to its limited knowledge, to its
tradition, to its racial inheritance and when that is operating

nothing new can take place. Right? Now I want to find out whether
that brain can be quiet, the old brain, so that a new movement can
take place. Right? I want to find out. I can only find out when in
relationship with another, watching the old brain in operation, and
the old brain understands the truth that it must be quiet in order that
a new operation can take place.
The brain is not forcing itself to be quiet. If it is forcing itself to
be quiet then it is the operation of the past still. In that there is
division, there is conflict, there is discipline and all the rest of it.
But if the old brain understands or sees the fact, the truth as long as
it is in constant response to any stimuli it must operate along the
old lines. If the old brain sees the truth of that then that old brain
becomes quiet. It is the truth that brings about the quietness, not the
intention to be quiet. Do you get this?
Because you see sirs, it is a very interesting question, because
one finds there are certain brains that are never conditioned. You
may say, how do you know? Naturally. I only know it because it
has happened to the speaker. You may not believe it, or believe it.
Just take the fact. I am asking why the brain must always be
functioning in this old pattern. If it does not function in its old
pattern it sets a new pattern according to its memories and setting a
new pattern in opposition to the old. Right? Aren't you following
all this? No?
Q: How do you know that you have not been conditioned?
K: Oh lord! You see, I ought not to have brought that in. I
thought you couldn't get it. Never mind, leave it for the moment,
we'll come to it.
You see we only use a very, very small part of the brain - right -

and that small part is the past. There must be and there is parts of
the brain which has not functioned at all, which are open, empty,
new. Right? Do you know anything about it? Don't agree to this.
We only know the old brain in operation, when you are at all
conscious of it. Now I am asking whether that old brain can be still
to a stimuli so that a new response can come out? That's my
question. I know - one knows the old brain, either superficially or
in depth, is conditioned. Right? There is no question about that right? Is there any doubt?
Q: How can you speak of conditioning if you say you are not
conditioned?
K: Don't bother about me sir. I said leave it, throw it out in the
wastepaper basket. Let's start. You see you are going back to
something which you haven't understood. You will understand
perhaps. Don't bring that in. If I brought that in, I am sorry. Forget
it!
I am asking myself why the old brain is constantly active, and
responding according to its background, which is conditioning.
And the next question is: how can that brain, which has been so
conditioned, not always respond to any stimuli, hold back a little?
Right? Hold back a little - can I go on? You seem to be so lost.
Q: It is very clear.
K: Very clear?
Q: Yes.
K: Thank god! And one finds when there is the necessity, the
urgency, and the importance of this question is vital, the brain does
hold back. Right? The old brain so that a new quality of the mind,
of the brain which has never been touched, operates. This has

happened, this is not only my experience. Any top scientist - top
scientist, not a scientist who is a slave to governments - but top
scientists free from governments and environments, and the desire
for success, for position, those are not scientists at all, they are
merchants; but the scientist who is free of governments and the
demands of governments and so on, he must have asked this
question, because how does he discover new things? If the old
brain is in operation all the time it can't discover anything new. So
it is only when the old brain is quiet that something new is seen.
Right? Like the man who invented the jet, though he had
tremendous knowledge of the piston, internal combustion
machinery, though he knew it all he had to find something new,
and therefore the old brain said, all right I'll keep quiet with all my
knowledge I have acquired, I am going to look, which means the
old brain must be quiet. And in that quiet state something new is
discovered. This is a fact, you don't have to fight with me. Now
without forcing the brain how can that quietness come, and the
brain voluntarily is quiet? You have understood sir?
I want to find out whether the brain sees the truth that as long as
it functions in the old pattern it can never discover anything new. It
can discover something new only when it sees the truth that the old
cannot find anything new and therefore the old becomes quiet. The
truth makes it quiet not it wishes to be quiet. Right? If that is very
clear, then can that quietness operate all the time and not the old
conditioning, and the old conditioning with its knowledge operates
only when it is necessary? Have you got my question rightly? Have
you got my question?
Q: You say operate all the time sir?

K: All the time. Please just listen sir. I don't say it must, I want
to find out. I am enquiring. I am not saying it must be quiet. I see
the old brain must operate. Right? Otherwise I can't go home,
otherwise I can't speak English, drive a car, recognize you. Right?
The old brain must operate, function. And as long as the old brain
is not quiet no new thing can be seen. Obviously, I have explained.
Right? Have you gone to sleep? You are following?
Q: Yes.
K: I am asking myself: what is the relationship between the new
quality of the brain which functions in quietness and its
relationship with the old? The old is thought. Right? The old is the
collection of memories and any response according to that memory
is thought, and that thought must function, otherwise you can't do
anything.
Q: Sir, aren't you making divisions?
K: No, it is not. No. No. No it is not division. It is like a house,
it is like the tent. The tent is a whole thing but there are divisions in
it.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: No, no. You are wrong sir. You are missing the whole point.
You haven't moved. Oh lord! Have you got it sir?
Q: Give some examples.
K: I don't give examples sir. I am lost with examples. I have
found two things sir. We have discovered two things. That the old
brain is the conditioned brain, which has accumulated knowledge
through centuries upon centuries. That is the old brain we'll call
that for the moment. It is just giving it a name, nothing more, just
giving it a name, not dividing as the old and the new, just to

convey the meaning that there is this whole structure of brain, one
part of that is the old, which doesn't mean it is separate from the
new. It is different.
Q: But yesterday you said that we are conscious...
K: Wait sir. We come back to that. We'll come back to the
whole business of consciousness. I am not contradicting myself. If
I am contradicting myself from what I said yesterday - I will tell
you I am contradicting. I am not such a silly person. I will go into
it.
Now I am saying to myself: I see this factor, that if the old brain
is in operation nothing new can be discovered. The new can only
be discovered when the old is quiet. And the old can only be quiet
when it sees the truth that the new cannot be discovered by the old.
Right? When the old sees the truth of that then it is quiet. Right?
Are we together?
Now it has been proved by scientists, by others, that a new thing
can be discovered only when the old is silent. Right? That is when
the old knows all the knowledge of internal combustion machinery,
when it wants to discover something new the old must obviously
be quiet. Now we have discovered this fact: the old must be
naturally quiet to discover something new. Right sir?
Q: Is the discovery made by the new or the old?
K: Is the discovery made by the new or the old.
Q: By neither of them.
K: Answer it sir. My brain - you see - now wait a minute! My
brain says, I really don't know whether it comes or not, I am going
to find out. Right? You have asked a question, which is, does the
old brain recognize the new - right madame - or does the new use

the old? You follow that sir? Please sir, you don't enter into this
because you haven't followed. Be quiet. You haven't entered into it
at all.
The old brain is quiet because it has understood completely that
it can never discover anything new, no new thing can happen. We
won't even use the word 'discover'. No new movement can take
place if the old is constantly in operation. The old sees the fact of
that and is quiet. And a new movement, a new happening takes
place. That happening, is it recognized by the old, or that very
happening opens the door for the old to utilize it. (Oh lord, you are
stuck in here, all of you, aren't you?) Look sir, this is really quite
important. It is really quite important, if you will forgive me saying
so, even if you don't follow it, it is really quite important because I
want to find a new way of living, a totally new way of living. And
I realize the old way of living is terrible, ugly, brutal, violent and
all the rest of it, the old way. I must find a new way - not a way, a
new dimension which is unrelated to the old. Right? Any
movement on the part of the old to discover a different dimension
is not possible. So that old realizes this, any movement from it
cannot possibly discover a new dimension, so it becomes quiet.
Right? Now what takes place in that quietness? Let's proceed along
that way.
What takes place when the old brain has understood that it
cannot find a new dimension, what takes place when it has realized
that? Right? What takes place? I am asking: what takes place sir?
You talk so much, you tell me?
Q: The old brain rests its memory.
K: No sir. No sir. All that is memory, word, response, trying to

capture the new is still part of the old. And I said when the old has
understood that no new thing can it discover, it naturally becomes
quiet. That is a fact. Right? That is a fact, not an invention. Now
what takes place when the old brain is absolutely quiet? That is my
next question.
Q: Would it be alone?
K: No, don't invent sir. Unless you experience this don't guess.
Q: Action.
K: The gentleman says, action. I don't know what you mean?
Q: There is space when it is quiet.
K: Now wait a minute. When the old brain is quiet, the
gentleman says there is space. Let's examine it. What do you mean
by space?
Q: Emptiness.
K: Emptiness. Right? When the old brain is completely quiet,
we are asking what takes place. Right? Sir, please don't invent,
guess, observe. Is your old brain quiet?
Q: No.
K: I'm going off.
Q: But can you ask that question? If the old brain is quiet, can
you ask that question?
K: I am asking you. It may be a wrong question but we must
find out.
Q: Surely it cannot ask that question because...
K: Sir I am asking.
Q: Which part of the brain is not used.
K: He is saying - just listen to what he is saying. When the old
brain is quiet perhaps a new part of the brain which has not been

used comes into operation. Just listen to it. Right? That is, we are
only functioning with a very small part of our brain. And when that
small part of the brain is quiet the rest of the brain may be active.
Or it has been active all the time but we don't know that it is active
because one part which has accumulated knowledge, tradition,
time, that is always active, super-active and therefore we don't
know the other part at all - which may also have its own activity.
Right? Are you following this?
This is really a very interesting question. Please give your
minds to this little bit, don't go off and say I don't understand and
just drop it. Apply. You see having used the old brain so much we
have never considered any other part of that brain. And what is that
part which may have a quality of a different dimension? And I say
that quality of a different dimension can be discovered when the
old brain is really quiet. That's all my point. You follow? When the
old brain is completely quiet, not made quiet, but naturally it has
understood that it must be quiet and therefore it is quiet, when it
has understood that, then we can find out what takes place when
the old brain is absolutely quiet. Right sir?
Now I am going to investigate, not you. Right? Because your
old brain is not quiet. Right? Would you agree to that? You don't
know. It has not understood the necessity of being completely quiet
under any stimuli, except of course physical stimuli, that is if you
put a pin into my leg it will respond, naturally. But as nobody is
putting a pin into my leg the old brain can be quiet. Right? Now I
want to find out what is the quality of the new brain. Right? The
quality that the old brain cannot recognize. Right? If it is able to
recognize the new then it is part of the old. Right? Because if the

old brain cannot recognize anything which it has not experienced,
which is not the outcome of memory. Right? Therefore when the
old brain recognizes then it is still the old. Right? Is that clear? So I
am asking: what is the new? The old brain doesn't know anything
about it, therefore it can only say, I really don't know. Right? Let's
proceed from there - do some of you follow this?
The old brain says, I really can't touch this and I really don't
know. Because I cannot touch it, because I cannot recognize it, I
am not going to be deceived by it I know nothing about it. Right? I
absolutely know nothing about the new dimension of this new
brain. Right? So when the old brain is quiet and is incapable of
recognition and therefore it can only say, I really don't know.
Right? Can the old brain remain in that state of not knowing? Right
sir? Because it has said, all my life I have functioned with
knowledge and recognition, all my life in functioning that way I
have said I know in terms of what I do not know, which I will
learn. But always within the pattern of knowing. Now it says, I
really don't know because something new is taking place, I really
don't know. The new cannot be recognized. Therefore I have no
relationship to it yet, I am going to find out. Is this so far clear?
Can we go on a little bit?
Now what is the brain that says, I do not know, the nature of not
knowing - you follow sir? The nature of not knowing, what is that?
When there is a state of not knowing is there fear in it? Which is
death. You follow sir? When the old brain actually says, I don't
know, it has relinquished all knowing. Right?
Q: Yes.
K: All knowing - don't say, yes, madame. It has relinquished

altogether the intention of knowing, of wanting to know. So there
is a field in which the old brain cannot function because it doesn't
know. Right? Now what is that field? Right? Can that field ever be
described? It can be described only when the old brain recognizes
it and verbalizes it, to communicate. Right sir? So there is a field in
which the old brain cannot possibly enter and this is not an
invention, this is not a theory, this is a fact when the old brain says,
I really don't know a thing about all this. Which means there is no
intention to learn about the new thing. You see the difference sir?
So: now I want to find out, non-verbally, because the moment I use
a word I am back in the old. Therefore is there an understanding of
something new non-verbally? Do you follow? Non-verbally in the
sense of not inventing a new word, or the intention to describe it so
as to capture it and hold it. So I am just enquiring, the mind is
looking at it, looking at something of which it does not know at all.
Right? Is that possible? You understand my question? I have
always looked at something in terms of learning about it, resisting
it, avoiding it, escaping from it, or overcoming it. Now it is doing
nothing of that kind. Is that possible? You understand? If it is not
possible you cannot possibly understand the other. Right sir?
What is the something which the brain - which the old brain
cannot possibly understand and therefore the old brain cannot
possibly know or acquire knowledge about - is there such a thing?
Or is it still an invention of the old brain wanting something new to
happen? Right? If it is the old brain wanting something to happen,
it is still part of the old brain. Now I have examined it completely
so that the old brain had understood its structure and nature and
therefore is absolutely still, not wanting to know. That is where the

difficulty lies.
Q: Sir I think that this is only love.
K: Don't sir, don't use words. You are missing the whole thing. I
am so sorry. This should really be discussed with really very, very
few who can go into this. It doesn't matter. We will go on.
You see, when you disturb it breaks. Is there something real, not
imagined, not invented, not a theory, something which the old
brain cannot possibly understand, or recognize, or want to
understand? Is there anything like that? For the speaker there is,
and therefore that has no value. Right? He may be deluding
himself, wanting to sit on the platform - it has no value. But it has
value in the sense only for you to discover it. Right? Therefore you
have to find out what is the relationship - please listen - what is the
relationship of the new, if you see the new, to the old and as the old
must operate in life, objectively, sanely, non-personally therefore
efficiently, what is the relationship of the new to the old? Does the
old capture the new and therefore live a different life? Or the new
operates in a way that the old cannot possibly recognize and that
operation is the new way of living? You have got it sir?
Just a minute sir. Go slowly. Take time, look. This brain has
lived for thousands of years, this old brain, with its consciousness;
the consciousness of the old brain is its content. Its content may
have been acquired superficially or in depth, and that is the old
brain, with all the knowledge, with all the experience of centuries
upon centuries of human endeavour, evolution. And when it is
functioning within that field of consciousness it can never discover
anything new. That is an absolute fact, not a theory. And so any
enquiry into freedom, into what love is, into what death is - do you

follow - of which we know nothing, except jealousy, envy, fear,
which are all part of the old content. This old brain then realizing
its utter limitation, becomes quiet because it has found there is no
freedom in it. Right? And because it has found no freedom in it a
new part of the brain is in operation. I don't know if you see that.
Look sir, I have been going south, thinking I am going north, and
suddenly one discovers south is not north at all. At the moment of
discovery, there is a total reversion. The reversion is not of the old,
it is completely reversed. Right? It is neither going north or south,
it is moving totally in a different direction. That is when it
discovers that its movement can never bring about freedom, at the
moment of discovery there is a totally different movement, which
is freedom. I don't know if you get it.
I don't know how much you have understood. I am awfully
sorry.
Q: Sir, could you discuss the difference between the intensity to
find out and the desire of the old for the new.
K: That we have gone into sir. The desire of the old for the new
is still the old, therefore the desire for the new or the experience for
the new - call it enlightenment, god, what you like, it is still part of
the old, therefore that's out.
Q: Krishnaji, do you realize that you have been speaking of the
most high philosophy, and we are not even able to have the small
relationship with each other.
K: Do you realize that you have been talking of the highest
philosophy and at the same time do you know that we have hardly
any relationship with each other.
Q: Who are we?

K: We have been through that sir. We are monkeys! Look, sir,
look at what you say, you are talking of the highest philosophy no, it is not talking of the highest philosophy, it is the pure thing,
but that doesn't matter - and you say you are talking of the highest
philosophy and yet do you realize that we have no relationship
with each other. If you realize that you have actually no
relationship with each other, actually not theoretically, that your
relationship with another cannot exist as long as the old brain is in
operation - right - because the old brain functions in images,
pictures, past incidences; and when the past incidences,
happenings, images, knowledge, is strong then relationship comes
to an end, obviously - no? If I have built an image about you, who
are my wife, or my friend, my girl or whatever it is, and that image,
that knowledge, which is the past, obviously prevents relationship.
Relationship means direct contact, immediately at the present, at
the same level, with the same intensity, with the same passion. And
that passion, intensity, at the same level, cannot exist if I have an
image about you and you have an image about me. Full stop. It is
for you to see if you have an image about somebody else.
Obviously you have. Therefore apply, work to find out. That is if
you really want a relationship with another - which I doubt
anybody does - we are all so terribly selfish, enclosed and if you
really want a relationship with another you have to understand this
whole structure of the past, which is what we have been doing.
And when that is gone you have a relationship which is totally new
all the time. And that new relationship is love, not the old, you
know beating the drum.
Now: you see sir, what is the relationship of love, which is the

new, which is the different dimension, which is not known, which
cannot be captured by the old, what is the relationship of that in
daily life? Right? That's my question, hold to it. What is the
relationship of that quality of that dimension to my everyday life? I
have discovered that dimension, it has happened, because I have
said the old brain can never be free, therefore the old brain is
incapable of finding out what truth is. Therefore the old brain says,
my whole structure is of time therefore I function only with regard
to that which has time - machinery, language, all the rest of it, but
the other part I will be completely still. Right? And what is the
relationship between the two? Has the old any relationship with
freedom, love, the unknown? Right? If it has relationship - please
listen - if it has relationship with the unknown then it is part of the
old - if it has relationship - you follow? But if the unknown has
relationship with the old then it is quite a different proposition - I
don't know if you see that?
Are we meeting each other somewhere? My question is: what is
the relationship between these two? And who wants relationship?
You are following? Who is demanding this relationship? Is the old
demanding the relationship. Right? If the old is demanding it, then
it is part of the old, therefore it has no relationship with the other.
Right? I don't know whether you see the beauty of this. The old has
no relationship with freedom, with love, with this dimension. But
the dimension, love, that new, can have a relationship with it, but
not the other way round. See it sir, do you?
So my question then is, the next step then is: what is the action
in life, daily life, when the old has no relationship with the new but
the new is establishing relationship as it moves in life? You have

understood my question? I have - the mind has discovered
something new. How is that new going to operate in the field of the
known? Right? In the field of the known is the old brain with all its
activities - you follow? - how is that going to operate?
Q: Would that be where intelligence comes in?
K: He says that is where intelligence comes in. Now wait a
minute sir, perhaps you are right. When the old brain sees that it
can never understand what freedom is - right - when it sees that it
is incapable of discovering something new, that very perception
that it cannot is the seed of intelligence, isn't it? Right? That is
intelligence. I can't do, I thought I could do a lot of things and I can
in a certain direction but in a totally new direction I can't do
anything. The discovery of that, the seeing of that, is intelligence,
obviously.
Now, what is the relationship of that intelligence to the other? Is
the other part of this extraordinary sense of intelligence? Right?
Now I want to find out what we mean by that word 'intelligence' the mind mustn't be caught by words, or the root meaning of that
word 'intelligence'. So I am just enquiring. Obviously the old brain,
all these centuries, thought it could do it, it could have its god, its
freedom, everything it wanted. And suddenly discovers that any
movement of the old is still part of the old, therefore intelligence is
the understanding that it can only function within the field of the
known. The discovery of that is intelligence, we say. Now what is
that intelligence, what is its relationship to life, to a dimension of
which the old brain doesn't know? Have you got it?
You see, intelligence is not personal, isn't the outcome of
argument, belief, opinion, reason, intelligence comes into being

when the brain discovers its fallibility, when it discovers what it is
capable of and what it is not capable of. The discovery of its
capacity and incapacity is intelligence. Now what is the
relationship between that intelligence and this new dimension?
Right? The relationship - its relationship - wait I have got it. Just
give me a minute, will you.
I would not use the word 'relationship'. The new dimension, the
different dimension can only operate through intelligence. Right?
If there is not that intelligence it cannot operate. Right sir. So in
daily life - I have got it, see how it works out sir, beautifully - so in
daily life it can only operate where intelligence is functioning.
Intelligence cannot function when there is the old operation, the
old brain is active. When there is any form of neurotic or nonneurotic belief and adherence to any particular fragment of the
brain. Right? All that is lack of intelligence. The man who believes
in god is not intelligent. The man who says there is only one
saviour, is not intelligent. The man who says I belong to this group,
Jew, Hindu, Muslim, is not intelligent, and therefore that cannot
operate. It is only the man that discovers the limitation of the old
and the very discovery of that is intelligence, and only when that
intelligence is functioning, can the new dimension operate through
it. Full stop. Good morning. Got it? (Clapping) No, don't clap
please. Don't. This isn't fun. Have you got some of it?
Q: May I put another question? I don't agree completely with
you. (Inaudible)
K: Sir that is what takes place when there is that intelligence.
The new - I won't use the word 'integrate' - the new operates when
there is that intelligence which is not only primary but which is

fundamental.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: I understand sir. The professor says, random, the happening,
the chance, what is that, what is its relationship to something
totally new? That is what he is asking, if I have understood it
rightly. The mathematical chance, the possibilities, the random, the
unexpected happening, like tossing a coin, head or tails, not
knowing, he says, what is that and what is its relationship to
something which is totally new? That's right sir? I don't know. That
is, there are events in one's life, happenings, that appear to be a
chance, happen by chance. Events that occur at random, you know,
not knowing, it happens. Is that happening new, totally unexpected,
or is that happening the result of unexamined, hidden, unconscious
events? Just a minute. I happen to meet you, by chance. Is that
chance at all, or it has happened because certain unconscious,
unknown, events have brought us together? Which we may
consider chance but it is not chance at all. I meet you. I didn't know
you existed. And in the meeting something has taken place
between us. And that may be the result of a great many other
events of which we are not conscious and we may then say, this is
a random event, this is a chance, unexpected, this is totally new. I
don't think, it may not be that at all. And is there chance in life at
all, a happening which hasn't a cause? Or have all events in life
have their basic deep cause, of which we may not know, and
therefore we may say our meeting is by chance, it is a random
event. And the cause undergoes a change when there is an effect.
The effect becomes the cause. Right? There is the cause, the effect
and the effect becomes the cause of the next effect. So cause/effect

is a constant chain, it is not one cause, one effect. It is undergoing
constant change. Each cause, each effect changes its next cause,
next effect. Right? So as this is going on in life, is there anything
which is unexpected, chance, an event at random? What do you say
sirs?
Q: The whole thing is based on causality.
K: I don't think life works that way. The cause sir becomes the
effect, and the effect becomes the cause - you can see this is life.
So we can never say, cause, effect and there it is. The doctor, the
professor said, what is the relationship of the unknown, not the
sense of new dimension, to this chance event?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: He and you discuss sir, but I know nothing at all about all
this. I am talking about my human relationship. Human beings. Not
mathematical problems and chances and events, and the
mathematical order - and mathematics is order - all that doesn't
seem to affect our daily life. We are concerned about our daily
living and to bring about a change in that daily living: the way we
behave and if our behaviour is based on the past it still brings
conflict, misery, that is all we are talking about.

SAANEN 4TH PUBLIC DIALOGUE 7TH
AUGUST, 1971
What shall we talk over together this morning?
Q: I would like to discuss fear and death and their relationship
to intelligence and thought.
K: Right, sir. You would like to discuss fear and death, and
what is the relationship between thought and intelligence.
Q: Could we set aside one morning to talk about the educational
process?
K: Should we set a morning apart to discuss or talk over what is
education.
Q: May I repeat a question which it is not necessary to answer
this morning: I would like to find out whether real love between
man and woman is possible because I think I know by now what
love is not. And also I am aware that I cannot love.
K: The gentleman wants to discuss, perhaps not this morning he
says but another morning, the relationship between man and
woman and whether there can exist love between them and so on.
Q: Could you go into that statement: the world is me and I am
the world?
K: Could you go into this question of the world is me and I am
the world.
Q: Could we discuss death, but not theorizing what happens
after but is it actually possible to die to things known?
K: Yes. Shall we discuss this morning this question of fear and
death? Shall we?
Audience: Yes.

K: And then sir perhaps we will answer your question and
various other questions involved in it.
Shall we go into it rather deeply? That means you have to keep
a sustained interest in it, a continuous enquiry, not just go off in the
middle of it to sleep, or think about something else, but pursue one
thing, like fear, completely to the end, shall we? And then death,
everything else will come into it. May we do that?
Q: We asked about humour and laughter. Can we bring that in?
K: Can we tie humour and laughter in with fear. (laughter) We
have tied it in now, haven't we? You know fear is such a complex
problem and we have to enquire into it, not come with any
preconceived ideas and so on - you know, really enquire, really
penetrate into this whole question of fear.
Now first of all when we are enquiring into this rather complex
problem, issue, we are not trying to deal with it as a group, as a
collective fear or in discussing a group therapy to get rid of fear.
We are just going to find out what fear means and what is its whole
structure, nature, whether that fear deep down in the very root of
our being can be understood and whether the mind can ever be free
from fear? Right?
How do you approach this problem? Have you fears? Have you
any kind of fear, physical or psychological? So if one has
psychological fears, we will come back to the physical fears a little
later, how do you deal with them? I am afraid - suppose - I am
afraid that I shall lose my position, my prestige, I depend on the
audience, on you, to bolster me up. I depend on you to give me
vitality by talking. And I am afraid if I grow older, become senile, I
will be faced with nothing and I am afraid. Right? You are

following this? Are you? So I am afraid. What is this fear? Or I am
afraid that I depend on you, man, woman, and that dependency
makes me attached to you, and I am afraid to loose you. You are
following all this? I am afraid I have done something in the past, of
which I regret or I am ashamed off, and I don't want you to know,
so I am afraid of that, of your knowing it. You are following all
this? And I feel guilty. Or I feel terribly anxious, anxiety about
death, living, what people say, what people don't say, how they
look at me, the deep sense of foreboding, anxiety, a sense of
inferiority. And this anxiety, death, living a life that has no
meaning, or out of my anxiety I seek some assurance from
somebody in human relationship, or I seek a sense of security out
of my anxiety in a certain belief, ideology, in god and so on. And
also I am afraid that I shan't be able to do everything I want to do
in this life. I haven't the capacity, or the intelligence but I am
tremendously ambitious to achieve something. And so I am
frightened of that too. You are following all this? And, of course, I
am afraid of death, and I am afraid of being lonely, not being loved
and so I want to establish a relationship with another in which this
fear doesn't exist, this anxiety, this sense of loneliness, this
separation. And also I am afraid of the dark, the lift and the
innumerable neurotic fears that one has. Right?
Now what is this fear? Why is one, you, I or anybody, why is
there this fear? Is it based on not being hurt, not to be hurt? Or is it
that one wants complete security and not being able to find it,
physically, emotionally, psychologically, intellectually, not being
able to find this sense of complete safety, security, protection, one
becomes terribly anxious about living, life, this sense of

uncertainty. Right? Now why is there fear?
Please this is a dialogue, I am not making a speech, please. This
is a dialogue, talking over together our problems. One of our major
problems is fear, whether we are aware of it or not, whether we run
away from it, or try to overcome it, try to withstand it, develop
courage and all the rest of it, there is still fear. I am asking you
whether the mind is so delicate, you understand, so sensitive that it
doesn't want to be hurt, from childhood on. And so not wanting to
be hurt one builds a wall, one is very shy, or aggressive, before you
attack I am ready to attack you, verbally, with thought, because I
am so sensitive, I have been hurt so much in my life, in my
childhood, everybody hurts, in the office - you follow - in the
factory, the foreman, the boss, everybody treads on each other's
toes, and I don't want to be hurt. Is that one of the reasons why fear
exists? You have been hurt, haven't you? No? And out of that hurt
we do all kinds of things, we resist a great deal, we don't want to be
disturbed, out of that feeling of hurt we cling to something which
we hope will protect us. And therefore anything that attacks that
which I am holding on to as protection, towards that I become
aggressive.
So what is it that you, as a human being sitting here, wanting to
resolve this problem of fear, what is it that you are frightened of? Is
it a physical fear? Fear not to have any more pain, physical pain? Is
it physical fear? Or a psychological fear of danger? Of uncertainty?
Of being further hurt? Of not being able to find total complete
security, certainty? Fear of not wanting to be dominated and yet we
are dominated? So what is it that you, as a human being sitting
here, are frightened of? Are you aware of your fear?

Q: The unknown.
K: Fear of the unknown. Is it? Now listen to that question. Fear
of the unknown. Why should one be afraid of the unknown, when
you know nothing about it? Please enquire into it.
Q: I don't believe that. I have an image of what will happen to
me when I try to be free.
K: But is it the fear of letting go the known, not the fear of the
unknown? You understand? Fear of the things I have gathered and
letting them go - my property, my wife, my name, my books, my
furniture, my good looks, or bad looks, my capacity, the things that
I know, have experienced - and letting them go, is that fear? Or the
fear of the future, the unknown?
Q: I find that my fear generally exists on what will happen and
not what is happening.
K: So your fear is of what will happen in the future, what might
happen tomorrow. Right? Shall we go into that?
You are not afraid of today, or what happened yesterday, but
you are frightened of what might happen tomorrow. Tomorrow in
the future.
Q: It isn't that one is frightened of what might happen tomorrow
but of losing that existence of now.
K: Look sir, the gentleman asked a question which is: he says I
am not frightened of yesterday or today, but I am frightened of
what might happen tomorrow, the future. Tomorrow may be
twenty four hours later or a year later, but the future, I am
frightened of that.
Q: But the future is the result of all the expectations one has
from the past.

K: Expectations one has because of the past. Now how will you
- please don't explain it - I am frightened of the future. Right? How
shall I deal with this? Don't explain it to me. I want to find out
what to do with this fear. I am frightened what might happen - I
might get ill, I might lose my job, a dozen things might happen to
me - I might go insane, I might lose everything, the things which I
have stored up. So the future. Go on please, enquire.
Q: I think it is not perhaps the future that we fear but rather the
uncertainty of the future.
K: That's right sir.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Yes, he says, fear is the uncertainty and the total response of
our whole being, about the uncertainty of what life is, what might
happen.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Is it, I am afraid of the future because the future is uncertain.
And this uncertainty, I don't know how to deal with it, with my
whole being, therefore I am afraid. Fear is an indication of this
uncertainty of the future, isn't it?
Q: That's only a part.
Q: There are other fears too.
K: Sir, we are taking that one fear. We will take various forms
of fear presently. We are asking, the gentleman asks, I am really
not frightened of anything except of the future. The future is so
uncertain, I don't know how to meet it. I haven't the capacity to
understand, not only the present but also the future. So it is this
sense of uncertainty that indicates fear. Now how am I - whatever
the explanation be, the fact is I am frightened of tomorrow - now

how shall I deal with it? How shall I be free of that fear of
tomorrow?
Q: It seems that looking at one's response to the uncertainty
that..
K: Sir, please help me. You understand? Don't theorize. I am
frightened of tomorrow, of what might happen, the whole future is
uncertain, there might be atomic war, there might be - you know,
god knows what, ice age, they say there is going to be an ice age in
fifty years - I am frightened of all this. How am I to deal with it.
Help me, don't theorize about it, don't give me explanations. I am
pretty good at explanations.
Q: Sir need uncertainty breed fear?
K: My darling sir, I am frightened of tomorrow, how are you
going to help me?
Q: Sir we are frightened because we are playing games and we
are afraid of being exposed.
K: I am frightened because I am playing a game and I am
frightened because I don't want to be exposed. But you are not
helping me!
Q: Well if you are playing a game you can stop playing that
game.
K: Aren't you frightened of the future sir? Don't - stick to this.
Aren't you frightened of the future?
Q: Yes, perhaps.
K: Yes, when you come down to it. Now how are you going to
deal with it?
Q: Living in the present.
K: Living in the present. I don't know what that means.

Q: I have to realize what I have been afraid of in the past and
why I have been afraid and examine them.
K: The lady says, let me understand the things I was frightened
of in the past, examine them and perhaps then I shall be able to
understand the uncertainty of the future.
Q: First of all we have got to understand what we mean by the
future.
K: That's what I am trying to find out sir.
Q: One thing we have to do, the first thing is not to be afraid of
being frightened.
K: Oh, that is a cliche, that doesn't help me.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: All this and you haven't fed me. You have given me a lot of
words, ashes. I am still frightened of tomorrow.
Q: That is the problem. I can't help someone, I can only deal
with my own fear.
Q: Can't you wait for tomorrow and see what happens?
Q: Sir, I used to be worried about security, not physical
security..
K: The gentleman means that sir. He probably has some
security physically, but psychologically he is frightened of
tomorrow. That is all. That is all what he is talking about. He has
got a little bank account, a little house, and all the rest of it, but he
is not frightened about that, he is frightened of what might happen
in the future.
Q: Is it possible to live with your uncertainty?
K: Is it possible to live with uncertainty.
Q: If we know what was going to happen..

K: Wait please.
Q: Sitting here I am not afraid but thinking about tomorrow I
am afraid.
Q: Thought. When we are frightened now it is a fact. If we
accept the fact and we are totally afraid now, to live in the present,
and if we live totally in the present we forget the future.
K: Right sir. Now let me look. I want to find out what causes
this fear of tomorrow. What is tomorrow? Why tomorrow exists at
all? You understand sir. I am going to answer you. I want to find
out how thought arises, how fear arises thinking about tomorrow.
Right sir? I think about tomorrow and the past has given me a
sense of security, though there have been a great many
uncertainties in the past but on the whole I have survived. And up
to now I am fairly safe. Right? And tomorrow is very uncertain and
I am frightened. In the past, though I have had fears, I have
somehow survived them. And tomorrow is total uncertainty. Now I
am frightened of that. So I am going to find out what causes this
fear of tomorrow. Right? Tomorrow being uncertainty, insecurity,
the response to that insecurity with my whole being, which is fear.
You are following sir? So I want to find out why fear arises when I
think about the future. Right? Which means the future may be all
right but my thinking about it makes it uncertain. I don't know the
future. Right? It may be marvellous, or it may be deadly, it may be
terrible or most beautiful, I don't know. But thought is not certain
about the future. So thought, which has been certain, which has
always been seeking certainty, is suddenly faced with this
uncertainty. Right? So why does thought create fear? You follow
sir? Why?

Q: Thought separates from the past and divides what might be.
K: This separation of 'what is' and 'what might be' is part of this
fear. Now I want to find out why thought creates this fear. If I
didn't think about tomorrow there would be no fear. Right? I would
not know the future. I wouldn't even care. Because I think about
the future, the future which I don't know, the future which is so
uncertain and my whole response, psychologically as well as
physiologically, is to say, "My god, what is going to happen".
Right? So thought breeds fear.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Sir, just a minute, I am taking that one particular thing, there
are other factors too.
Q: Sir, I understand there is fear of the unknown, fear of
tomorrow, that can be understood if I understand what I am
attached to a particular form of belief.
K: Sir, fear of the future, the gentleman says, can be understood
if I understand why I am attached to a particular form of belief, to a
particular convention, to a particular formula and so on.
Q: What about fear of existence?
K: Fear of living. Sir all these are involved, are they not? The
attachment to a belief, to a formula, to a certain ideological concept
which I have built for myself, all these are part of this fear. Right?
Now I want to find out by seeing, what is fear. I said that to you
earlier sir, I have done something in the past of which I am
ashamed, or of which I am frightened, I don't want it to recur, I am
frightened of something that has happened in the past. Or I am
frightened of something that might happen in the future. Thinking
about what I have done in the past breeds fear doesn't it? Thinking

about the past. Are you following this? Thinking about the future,
what might happen, also breeds fear. So I see, I may be wrong, we
are examining, that thought is responsible for this fear, both of the
past and of the future. Right? And thought is also responsible for
fear by projecting an ideal, a belief and holding on to that belief
and wanting certainty out of that belief, it is all the operation of
thought, isn't it. Right sir? So I have to understand why thought
thinks about the future, why thought goes back to some event, a
happening which brought fear. Now why does thought do this?
Q: Thought, can thought help itself by imagining all the
possibilities and terrible things that could happen in the future, it
can make some plans to prevent these things happening. Try to
protect itself.
K: Sir, and also thought helps you to protect yourself, doesn't it,
through insurance, through building a house, avoiding wars,
thought cultivates fear and also protects, doesn't it? So we are
talking about thought creating fear, not how it protects. Come on
please, may I go on? I can go on but will you go on with me? Will
you also go into this by yourselves with me? That is, I am asking
why thought breeds this fear, as thought also breeds pleasure,
doesn't it? No? Sexual pleasure, the pleasure of the sunset which
happened yesterday and so on and so on. So thought gives a
continuity to pleasure - right - and also to fear.
Q: Sir, man from pleasure tries to destroy human thought,
discrimination, this is good and that would be bad. And fear seems
to come directly from that, for the good thing happening and
avoidance of the bad.
K: Sir, surely the whole process is based on thought, isn't it?

Q: The discriminate thought aspect.
K: Yes sir but it is still thought, saying this is good, I'll keep it,
this I won't, reject. But the whole movement of thought is the
demand for pleasure - right sir - and discriminating in that, saying
this will give me pleasure, that will not give me pleasure. So the
whole movement of fear and pleasure, the demand and the
continuity of both, depends on thought, doesn't it?
Q: But how can you be free from it?
K: Wait, wait. First let's get this thing going.
Q: Thought is fear.
K: We are going to find out, sir. I am safe today. I know I am
going to have my meals today, there is a house, a room there today I am quite sure; but I don't know what is going to happen
tomorrow. I had a great deal of pleasure yesterday in various
forms, and I want those pleasures repeated tomorrow. You follow?
So thought both sustains fear and gives a continuity to pleasure,
which I have had yesterday. No? Come on sirs!
Then my question is: how am I, not only to prevent the
continuity of fear, but also I want pleasure to continue, don't I?
You are following this? No? I want pleasure on one side and I want
as much as possible, all the time - tomorrow, the day after, all the
time, in the future; and also I have had fears and I want to get rid of
them and also I don't want future fears. Right? So thought is
working in both directions. Right? No? Sir this is your job, not
mine, look at it!
Q: This gives thought a kind of energy.
K: Thought is energy.
Q: This gives thought a different kind of energy.

K: Sir, go into it.
Q: It is accumulating memories.
K: Accumulating memories. The memories that have been
pleasurable I hold on to, and the memories that have been painful,
which are fear, I want to throw out. Right? But I don't see the root
of all this is thought.
Q: Perhaps when you are doing something so totally that you
think about the thing that is giving you pleasure while it is
happening and don't think about these things which may not
happen because..
K: So how am I to say, don't think about those things which
might not happen - how am I to prevent myself thinking about it?
Q: Thinking about what is happening today, rejoice.
K: So I force myself to think about things that are happening
and not about things that don't happen.
Q: Think about what is happening.
K: What is happening. But my mind is always watching what
might happen.
Q: How does thought come into being?
K: Doesn't this happen to you?
Q: No. Yes, but..
K: Let's be quite simple and honest. We want to think about the
things that are happening but my thought also keeps an eye on
what might not.
Q: It does but still..
K: Yes it is there. And when I am not thinking about this that
pops up! Look Madam, do let's be simple.
Q: (Inaudible)

K: I want to go into it sir but you prevent it.
Q: Sir the feeling 'I am' has nothing to do with fear and nothing
to do with thought. I think only 'I am'. I don't have fear. This
feeling 'I am' has nothing at all to do with thought.
K: Sir, when you say 'I am' - what do you mean by that word 'I
am'?
Q: A feeling to be present, to be sitting here, and there is no fear
in it sir.
K: Sir, that is not the problem.
Q: To find out if there is certainty, or not. Then you won't be
afraid.
K: How shall I find out?
Q: I see the whole process of thought in this sense as a trap.
K: Sir you won't go into it. Each person pursues something else.
Look. Let me state what I feel, what the problem is.
I am frightened of tomorrow, because tomorrow is uncertain.
And I have been so far fairly certain in my life, though there have
been occasions in which I have been frightened, somehow I have
got over them. But the sense of fear, of tomorrow, which is so
uncertain - war, atomic war, the casual wars that might explode
into all kinds of horrors, you know, losing money, Nixon making a
move and the stock market going down, I am in a state of
convulsion about the future. Now what am I to do? I want to be
free, if I can, of fear of both the past and of the future, both fear
deep down and the superficial fears - what am I to do? Don't give
me explanations, do this, don't do that. That's nothing. I want to
find out what fear is, whether it is of darkness, whether it is of
uncertainty, whether it is the fear of attachment, holding on to

some person, ideas, fear. You follow? I want to find out what is the
root of it, not how to escape from it, not how to smother it. I want
to see the structure of fear. If I can understand that then something
else can take place. So I am going to investigate to find out what
that fear is. Let me go on a little while. Right? May I?
Now for me fear exists because I am thinking about tomorrow
because tomorrow is so uncertain, any amount of your assurance
that tomorrow is perfectly all right, but I still feel fear. Now why
am I thinking about tomorrow? Is it because the past has been so
good, the past has given me a great deal of knowledge and this
knowledge has become my security, and I have no knowledge
about the future. So if I could understand the future and reduce that
to my knowledge then I won't be frightened. And can I understand
the future as knowledge, as experience - you are following this - so
that I have understood it, so that it becomes part of my knowledge
of which I shan't be frightened? Right? I'll go on.
So I see also that I want a great deal of pleasure - sexual
pleasure, the pleasure of achieving, fulfilling, being somebody,
being very clever and the pleasure which I have had, I want those
pleasures repeated, repeated, repeated. Or when I get bored with
those pleasures I want wider, deeper pleasures. So I want to avoid
fear and I want more pleasure. Right? This is what we all want.
And are these two separate? Is pleasure separate from fear? Or are
they two sides of the same coin? I must find out. Not say yes or no,
I must find out, get my teeth into it, find out whether pleasure does
breed fear and whether fear is the result of my demand for
pleasure. You have understood my question? My principle drive is
pleasure - pleasure in every direction. I want to be fed tomorrow

because it gives me great pleasure, assurance, certainty.
Q: That pleasure could be something else..
K: No, but that pleasure is also painful, but I'll overcome it in
order to have more pleasure. Haven't you noticed this in your life?
How we want more pleasure?
Q: Yes.
K: That's all I am talking of. First, we are demanding, pursuing
pleasure, primarily, in our looks, the dress we wear - you follow everything is based on this. And when that is not fulfilled then I
become uncertain. So I am asking myself whether pleasure and
fear don't go together? And I am frightened, I never question
pleasure - you understand - never say, by Jove, should I have so
much pleasure, where does this pleasure lead but I want more of it,
in heaven, on earth, in my family, in sex, everything, it is driving
me. And fear is there also. Look at it please, madam. Don't stick to
your particular opinion, for god's sake move away from it. Find
out.
And also I fear tomorrow, I don't know what tomorrow is. And
if I could reduce tomorrow in terms of my knowledge then I shan't
be frightened. So - follow this - I want certainty of tomorrow, and
certainty can only exist when there is knowledge. This I say "I
know". Right? Now can I know anything except the past? The
moment I say "I know", it is already the past. When I say, "I know
my wife", I know my wife in terms of the past. So in the past there
is certainty. And in the future there is uncertainty. So I want to
draw the future into the past so that I will be completely safe.
So I see fear arises where thought is operating, if I didn't think
about tomorrow there would be no fear.

Q: I am not afraid of the future, what I am afraid of is now.
When I am afraid it is now, not of the future, or of the past.
K: Yes sir. But sir, fear now, how does it come?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: I don't know how to deal with this thing. You see each of us
has an opinion. Each of us is quite sure we know how to deal with
fear. We will explain it, we give causes, we think we understand it,
and yet at the end of it we are frightened. So I say to myself,look,
keep your opinions, hold on to them, suffocate yourself with those
opinions, but still you will be afraid at the end of it. I want to go
behind all that and find out why fear exists at all. Is it the result of
thought? Thinking about the future? Because the future is very
uncertain and thought is based on the memory of the past. Right?
Thought is the response of memory, accumulated as knowledge, as
experience for centuries and out of that comes thought. Then
thought says knowledge is my security, knowledge. And now you
are telling me to be free of tomorrow. I am uncertain, if I knew
what tomorrow is there will be no fear. Right? What I am craving
for is certainty of knowledge. I know my past, I know what I did
ten years ago, or two days ago. It is very clear, I can analyse,
understand, live with it; but tomorrow I don't know and therefore
not knowing makes me afraid, and not knowing means not having
knowledge of. Now can thought have knowledge about something
which it does not know? You are following this? So there is fear:
thought trying to find out the future, and not knowing what its
content is, is afraid. So then I say to myself, why is thought
thinking about tomorrow, about which it knows nothing, it wants
certainty but there may be no certainty? Right? But yet why does

thought think about tomorrow? Right sir? Why? Please answer my
question, not your question.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Sir, we said that. I said that sir.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Sir, if I may say so, we did say thought is necessary to
protect physically its survival. Right? That is part of out life, that is
what we are doing all the time.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Madam, we are mixing up two things. Please, we tried to
explain at the beginning of this.
Q: She's right. She's right.
K: I agree with her.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Sir, I agree with you. One must know that tomorrow that
house will be there, tomorrow I have to have my meals. Physical
survival and the planning for the future is essential, isn't it?
Without that I can't survive.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: It is hot weather, I need cooler trousers; I must plan to buy
some trousers that will be cool. That means planning for tomorrow.
I must plan. I have to go to India in the winter. I will plan, which is
in the future. We are not denying that, on the contrary. What we
are talking about is the fear of uncertainty.
Q: We have no confidence in ourselves.
K: That really I don't understand. Who is yourself for you to
have confidence in? You are such a marvellous human being to
have confidence in yourself?

Q: Why not?
K: What in yourself?
Q: Humanity.
K: What is humanity? Oh Madam. What is humanity? The good
and the bad, the war - we have been through all that. So we are
concerned with fear, not use thought to survive, I am not saying
that. We must use thought to survive. But to survive thought has
divided the world. Right? As my country, your country, my
government, your government, my god, your god, my beastly guru
and your beastly guru - you follow? My opinion - we have divided,
and thought has created this. Though it wants to plan to survive
thought has divided the world, which destroys itself, of which I am
part. So I have to understand the nature of thought, where it is
necessary and where it is diabolical, where it is destructive, where
it creates fear - that is all my problem. I said thought must function
otherwise you can't survive but in the very desire to survive it has
divided and is therefore destroying itself. Right? You can see this
so simply. So I see thought must function clearly, objectively
without any distortion as mine, yours, my god, your god. You
follow? And also I see very clearly thought produces fear. So my
question is: why does thought think about tomorrow? It has to
think about tomorrow in one direction; why does thought think
about the future and breed fear?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: No you are not answering madam.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Why do you think about tomorrow sir?
Q: To be safe.

K: You see thought must think about tomorrow in order to be
safe. That is clear. And also you see why thought thinking about
tomorrow creates fear. Now why?
Q: Because we want to continue.
K: Look! It is now eighteen minutes to twelve and we have got
three more minutes and we haven't solved this problem because we
refuse to leave our particular little opinions, judgements,
conclusions, we say, let's abolish them and think anew.
For me it is very simple. Thought must create fear because
thought cannot ever find security in the future. Thought has
security in time. Tomorrow has no time. Right? Tomorrow exists
in the mind as time but tomorrow may not exist at all
psychologically. And because of that uncertainty thought projects
what it wants for tomorrow, safety, what I have acquired, what I
have achieved, what I possess, all that. And that too is completely
uncertain. So can I, can thought be quiet about the future? That's all
my point. Can thought be quiet, which is function where it is
necessary to protect physically - you follow - and therefore no
nationalities, no divisions, no separate gods, no warmongers. And
can thought be quiet so that time as tomorrow doesn't exist. Yes
sirs. Therefore I have to understand what it is to live now. Right? I
don't understand what it is to live now, nor have I understood what
it is to live in the past and therefore I want to live in the future,
which I don't know, which I don't know what the present is. So I
am asking can I live completely, wholly, today? I can only do that
when I have understood the whole machinery and the functioning
of thought, and in the very understanding of the reality of thought
there is silence. And where the mind is quiet there is no future, no

time.

SAANEN 5TH PUBLIC DIALOGUE 8TH
AUGUST, 1971
K: What shall we talk about this morning?
Q: Sir, haven't you covered enough ground, I'd like to
consolidate in myself what you've been speaking about already but I don't want to go over the hills. I want to find out more about
death. And I'm not quite sure in myself whether I have got this
relation between thought and fear.
K: Shall we discuss that? The gentleman asks, he doesn't want
to climb the hills and reach the top, but he wants to understand the
relationship between thought and fear.
Q: Sir, can you tell me if I have my facts right so far - you said
that thought is something of the past, that was dead, decayed and
buried - thought. And you said that when we live tomorrow,
tomorrow is the unknown. Am I right so far?
K: Little bit, yes.
Q: Now when thought meets the unknown, it doesn't know what
to do. Now if we can have thought without time, if there's no time,
then there's no fear.
K: We'll go into that, sir. Would you like to talk about that?
Q: Yes.
K: What is time - we'll come to that sir. What is time? I had to
be here this morning, in spite of this bad weather, at half past ten.
And I was. And if I didn't come on time, I'd keep you all waiting
and it would be rather unfortunate. There is the time by the watch.
There is time to cover a certain distance, between here and the
moon, time to go from here to Montreux, and so on, to cover the

distance, whether that distance be between my image of myself or
the image I have projected of myself and what I should be - the
distance between what I am and what I should like to be, between
fear, and the ending of fear.
So there is time by the watch, yesterday, today and tomorrow please, we must understand this.
Q: Can you give practical examples as you go along?
K: I'm not good at giving practical examples - we'll get into it,
sir. It's fairly simple, what I'm saying. I'm not a philosopher, for
god's sake, I don't spin theories.
There is time as yesterday, today and tomorrow. And there is
time, at least we think there is time, between what I am and what I
should be, between the fact of fear and the eventual ending of fear.
Both are time, aren't they? No? The chronological time and time as
invented by thought - I am this and I should change to that. And to
cover that distance I need time, between what I am and what I
should be. Right, sir? That is time also. No? It'll take me many
days or many weeks to do certain exercises, properly, to loosen up
my muscles; to completely do a proper exercise I need physical
time, that is, I'll take perhaps three days or a week - that's time.
Now - so let us be clear when we talk about time what we are
talking about - there is the chronological time, as yesterday, today
and tomorrow, and the time which is, at least we think it is,
necessary to achieve an ending to fear. Right? No? I'm sorry - be
patient, because other people don't understand - you may
understand it - please. Time is part of fear, isn't it? I am afraid of
the future, not what might happen in the future but the idea of the
future, the idea of tomorrow. Right? So there is psychological time

and the chronological time.
Now we are talking all the time, not chronological time by the
watch, and so on, but we are talking of time as the past, present and
the future. That is, I am all right now but I am afraid of the future,
tomorrow. Right. Now that is the psychological time. Right, sir?
Let's call that psychological time - we'll change the name but it
doesn't matter.
Now I am asking, is there such a thing as psychological time at
all. Or is it merely an invention of thought? I shall meet you
tomorrow, under a tree, near the bridge - that is chronological time.
I am afraid of tomorrow and I don't know how to meet that fear of
tomorrow. That is psychological time, isn't it.
Q: You mean thought is tomorrow now.
K: Don't mix it up yet, we'll work up slowly into this.
Q: Sir, how about if I say, why must this beautiful thing come to
an end?
K: Why must this beautiful thing come to an end. That's also
psychological time, isn't it? I hold a particular relationship as
beautiful, and I don't want it to end. That is, the idea that it might
come to an end, and I'm afraid I won't like it to come to an end, and
I'm afraid of it. Right.
So that's one part of this structure of fear. The other is, I have
known security, certainty. And tomorrow is uncertain and I'm
afraid of that - that is psychological time, isn't it? I have known and
lived a life of semi-quasi-certainty, security, but tomorrow is so
dreadfully uncertain, and I'm frightened of it. Then arises my
problem, how am I not to be afraid. All that is involved, surely is it
not, in psychological time. Right? And the knowledge of yesterday,

our many thousand yesterdays, has given me, has given to the brain
a certain sense of security. Right - are we following - no, sir?
Knowledge, has given security to the mind, knowledge being
experience, remembrance, memories. That is, in the past there has
been security, for the brain. Tomorrow there may be no security at
all, I might be killed.
So knowledge as time gives to the brain a sense of security. No?
Got it? So knowledge is time. And I am afraid I have no
knowledge of tomorrow, therefore I am afraid. So if I had
knowledge of tomorrow I wouldn't be afraid. So knowledge breeds
fear. And yet I must have knowledge. Is it getting too much? You
are following? I must have knowledge to go from here to the
station, I must have knowledge to speak English, or French, or
Italian or whatever it is, I must have knowledge to do any kind of
function. And yet knowledge, which I have accumulated about
myself as an experiencer, and that experiencer is frightened of
tomorrow because he doesn't know tomorrow. Right?
Q: Sir, what about repetition?
K: What about repetition - it is the same thing, mechanical.
After all, knowledge is repetitive. I add to it or take away from it
but its a machinery of accumulation. Come on, sirs.
Q: Sir, what about the people that have terrible tragedies, with
people being slaughtered?
K: What has that got to do with what we are talking about.
Q: Well, you see, included in that is fear.
K: Wait a minute, we are talking about what is the relationship
between thought and fear.
Q: But even so, people have been telling me their problems,

telling me how their fear remains in them and they can't get rid of it
because for them man is a beast, he is not a human being at all, and
therefore...
K: People have had most unpleasant experiences in relationship
with man. That relationship has brought great torture, great pain,
great horror and that fear of human beings and what they have
done remains. What is one to do with that - it is the same problem,
surely. No? That is, I have been hurt, by a snake or a human being.
I have been hurt. And that hurt has left a deep mark on my brain.
And I am afraid of snakes and I'm afraid of human beings, which is
the past. And also I am afraid of tomorrow. Right, sirs? It's the
same problem, isn't it, only one is in the past, the other is in the
future. No?
Q: It's only difficult when you say, knowledge gives security they find it difficult because they find the knowledge of yesterday
has given them insecurity.
K: Wait, wait. Knowledge also gives insecurity, doesn't it? And
also knowledge gives security. I have been hurt by human beings
in the past - that's knowledge. That remains deep, deeply rooted,
and I loathe human beings. I am frightened of them, which is
knowledge.
Q: One isn't speaking of psychological knowledge but physical
torture.
K: Yes, physical torture, which is again in the past.
Q: Yes, but you know that in the present people are going on
doing it.
K: In the present, people are going on doing it. In East Pakistan,
in I don't know, in Russia, in China or in the prison, they are doing

it. You see, you are mixing up two facts. We are talking - what are
we talking about may I ask? Fear, isn't it? Fear and its relationship
to thought. There are tortures, physical tortures going on in the
world, people are extraordinarily brutal in the world now,
physically. And I like to think about it and get terribly excited.
Right? And feel morally righteous about it, and I can't do anything,
can I, sitting in this room or hall or tent, can't do anything about
what is happening in another place. But I like to kind of get excited
about it, neurotically get excited, say, well, it's terrible what the
human beings are doing. No? What can I do actually? Join a group
that's going to stop this torture of human beings? Make a
demonstration in front of somebody - and yet the torture will go
on.
So what am I concerned about, how to change the human mind
that will not torture human beings, physically, psychologically, in
any way? But if I am neurotic I like to keep on thinking, oh, how
terrible all this world is.
Now let's come back. All right, sir? Now, I am afraid what
human beings have done to me or to another human being, and that
knowledge is in the brain, a scar. That is, knowledge of the past not
only gives uncertainty but also the certainty that I may be hurt
tomorrow. The same - therefore I am afraid.
Now why does the brain retain the memory of that hurt of
yesterday? In order to protect itself? From the future hurts? Let's
think it out, sir. That means, I am always facing the world with that
hurt. Right? And therefore I have no relationship with another
human being, because this hurt is so deep. Right? And I resist
every human relationship because I might get hurt again. Therefore

there is fear. Knowledge of the past hurt and the fear of future hurt,
brings fear. But yet I must have knowledge.
So, knowledge has been accumulated through time - scientific
knowledge, technological knowledge, knowledge of a language
and so on. To learn a language you need time. To learn any
technology I must have time and so on and so on. Knowledge,
which is the product of time, must exist, otherwise I can't do
anything, I can't talk to you, I can't communicate with you.
But also I see that knowledge of the past, as being hurt, that
very knowledge says, "Be careful not to be hurt in the future." So
I'm afraid of the future. You follow, sir?
So how am I who have been hurt very deeply, scarred, how am I
to be free of that and not project that knowledge into the future and
say, "I am afraid of the future." There are two problems involved,
aren't they? There is the scar of pain, hurt, and the knowledge of it
makes me afraid of tomorrow. I have the scar, can the mind be free
of that scar? Now let's examine that.
I'm sure most of us have some kind of psychological scars, hurts
- haven't you? Of course. And also we're not talking about the
physical scars which affect the brain and all the rest of that - we
leave that aside for the moment. There are the psychological scars
of hurt. How is the mind, the brain, to be free of them? Must it be
free of them? Is not the memory of it, of being hurt, a protection
against the future? You have hurt me, verbally, in many ways you
have hurt me. There is a memory of it. If I forget that - please
follow it - I come innocently to you next morning, you hurt me
again. Right? So what am I to do? Go on, think it out, sir. Go on.
Q: Sir, isn't it important for me to find out why I am

psychologically capable of being hurt?
K: Why am I psychologically capable of being hurt? It's fairly
simple - we are very sensitive, you know, there are dozens of
reasons. I have an image about myself, and I don't want you to hurt
that image. I think I am a great extraordinary man and you come
along and put a pin into it; and it hurts me. I feel terribly inferior
and I meet you who feel extraordinarily superior and I feel, my
lord - I get hurt. You are clever, I am not - I get hurt. You are
beautiful, I am not - you follow.
Q: Sir, I'm somewhat confused, the word 'brain' and the word
'mind' as synonyms. Are you using them in the same context?
K: Little bit, sir, little bit. We'll come to that.
Q: It confuses me sometimes in understanding something.
K: Right, right. The knowledge of being hurt, not only
physically but psychologically, inwardly, has left a mark on the
brain as memory. Memory is knowledge. Right? And why should I
be free of that knowledge? If I am free, you're going to hurt me
again. Therefore that knowledge acts as a resistance, as a wall. And
what happens in relationship between human beings when there is
this wall between you and me?
Q: We can't meet.
K: Exactly. So what do we do? Go on, sir pursue it.
Q: Take away the wall.
K: But you're going to hurt me.
Q: Only the image.
K: No, sir. Look, I come to you quite innocently - you know,
the word 'innocence' means the incapacity of being hurt. That
word, the root meaning of that word, 'innocent' is that you cannot

be hurt. You look in the dictionary you'll see it. But let's go on with
it. So I come to you open, friendly and you say something to me
which hurts me. Doesn't this happen to all of you? And what takes
place? That left a mark, that's knowledge. What is wrong with that
knowledge? That knowledge acts as a wall between you and me.
Right? Of course. You're doubtful of that? Therefore what shall I
do? You've hurt me, many times.
Q: Break through the wall...
K: Wait, wait - look at it first, don't say break through or - just
look at it. You've hurt me and the knowledge of that remains. If I
have no knowledge of it, you will hurt me again. And if I have that
knowledge strengthened, it acts as a wall between you and me.
Therefore between you and me there is no relationship. So
knowledge of the past prevents a relationship between you and me.
Right? So what shall I do? Go on, sirs, what shall I do?
Q: See if it's true, examine it.
K: I've examined it, I've taken ten minutes in the examination of
it. And I see that examination, that analysis is totally useless.
Q: Is this where time comes in?
K: I've taken ten minutes - analysis implies ten minutes. And
that ten minutes is a waste.
Q: But you have used time.
K: I'm going to show you - I've used time. Don't say there is no
time.
Q: But if there wasn't any time.
K: I don't know, that's just a supposition. I have taken ten
minutes to see why I'm hurt, to examine the hurt, see the necessity
of keeping that hurt as knowledge. And I've asked myself, if I

remove that hurt, won't you hurt me again? And I see, as long as
that hurt remains, there is no relationship between you and me. All
that has taken more then a quarter of an hour. And I see, by Jove,
what have I achieved at the end of it - nothing.
So I've found analysis has no value at all. I mustn't go into that you'll get lost. So, what shall I do, having hurt, having been hurt
and remembering that hurt prevents all relationship?
Q: We have to accept being hurt.
K: No, I'm neither accepting nor rejecting, I'm looking, I'm
analysing, I don't accept anything, or reject anything. So my
question then is, "Why am I hurt?" Right? What is this thing that is
being hurt?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Sir, say something that's actual, don't imagine, don't, you
know, and then don't verbalize. First find out what it is that is being
hurt.
Q: The knowledge of what is being hurt.
K: When I say I am hurt, because you call me a fool, what is it
that's being hurt?
Q: Pride.
K: Pride?
Q: It's the knowledge of being a fool is there.
K: No, madam, it is not that - please look at it - not only that,
much deeper than that.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: No, don't - please look at it. I am hurt, because you called me
a fool. Why should I be hurt because you called me a fool?
Q: Surely it's the image I have of myself.

K: Which means, so I have an image of myself as not being a
fool. And when you call me a fool or a blackguard or a whatever it
is, I get hurt, because my image is that. Right. Now I say to myself,
why do I have an image about myself. So as long as I have an
image about myself I'm going to be hurt.
Q: Why do I have to care about the image that the other has
about me?
K: Of course, sir, the other has an image of me as a fool. Or the
image of me as a great intellect - it's the same thing, you follow image. Now why do I have an image about myself.
Q: Because I don't like what I am.
K: Wait, no. First why do you have it, sir, because you don't like
yourself as you are? Wait. What are you? Have you looked at
yourself, without image? Sir, look, let's be simple. I have an image
about you as being very clever, bright, intelligent, awake,
enlightened, sitting on the top of a hill. Tremendous image.
Because of that image I have of you I say you are very clever. And
in comparison with myself I am dull. Comparing myself with you I
am dull. Right? Measuring myself with you I find I'm inferior.
Come on. Obviously. And that makes me feel I'm very dull, very
stupid, inferior. And from all that feeling of dullness, inferiority,
stupidity, I have many other problems. Now why do I compare
myself with you at all? Is it that we have been brought up from
childhood to compare? In schools we compare, you are not as
bright as your brother or the boy, top boy - we compare through
marks, giving of marks, through examinations, the mother saying,
"Be as bright as your elder brother." You know, this terrible
business of comparison all the time throughout life. And if I don't

compare, where am I? Am I dull? No, I don't know. I've called
myself dull in comparing myself with you, who are not dull. But if
I don't compare, what happens?
Q: I become myself.
K: What is yourself? Just see, sir, the cycle we go through, say,
repeating these things over and over again without understanding
them. So I come back, why do I have to have an image about
myself, good, bad, noble, ignoble, ugly or dull, bright, why do I
have an image? About anything, about myself.
Q: It's a means of contact with others.
K: It's a means of contact or relationship with others - is that so?
Q: A man that is conscious and aware must automatically
become involved to compare...
K: Sir, I'm asking why should, why do I compare. Comparison
implies not only conflict but imitation, doesn't it?
Q: It is necessary to evaluate...
K: Wait. So again look at it, watch it, please. Comparison
implies conflict and imitation, doesn't it? That's one side of it. No?
In comparing myself with you I feel I'm dull, therefore I must
struggle to be as clever as you are - conflict. And I then imitate
what you are. That's implied in that, conflict and imitation. But also
I see I must compare between this cloth and that cloth, materials,
this house and that house. No? Compare, measure, whether you are
tall or short, compare, measure, the distance between here - and so
on. You follow? So why do I have an image about myself, because
if I have an image about myself it's going to be hurt.
Q: Perhaps this image doesn't exist at all.
K: Go on, sir, investigate it. Why do I have an image about

myself as something or nothing.
Q: I want to be secure.
K: That means you're saying that you're seeking, taking security
in an image. Is that it? Which is what? That image has been put
together by thought. So you are taking security in the image which
thought has built and in that image thought is seeking security.
Thought has created an image because it wants security in that
image. So thought is seeking security in itself. Right? Which is,
thought is seeking security in the image which it has built and that
image is the product of thought, thought is memory, which is the
past. Come on. So thought has built this image about myself, about
itself - not myself, about itself. No?
Q: Sir, may I ask you something?
K: Please stick to this point.
Q: Yes, I am, it is to do with education, I suppose, because even
when one starts to compare one's own child and say to this child,
you are more clever than...
K: I know, sir, I said so, we said so. Parents are the most
dangerous human beings. They destroy their children, because they
are uneducated.
So, image is built by thought and thought is seeking security,
and so thought has invented an image in which it finds security, but
it is still thought. And thought is the response of memory,
yesterday. So what has happened? Knowledge of yesterday has
created this image. Come on, sir. So how am I not to be hurt? Not
to be hurt implies not having any kind of image, obviously. Now
how am I to prevent images - image of the future, of which I'm
going to be frightened? Thought is time, thought is fear of the

image of tomorrow, in which there is no certainty. So how am I,
how is the mind or the brain not to have images at all, and yet not
be hurt? Please just listen. Not to have an image at all and not to be
hurt. The moment it is hurt it's going to have an image. And being
hurt it protects itself with another image.
So my question is, can the brain, apart from the physical aspect
of it, where it has to protect itself against rain, you follow, danger,
precipice, snakes, polluted air, wars, etc., etc., - apart from physical
danger where protection is necessary, can the brain not be hurt at
all? Which means, not to have any kind of image.
Q: The energy, sir.
K: Sir, if you don't mind, don't bring in another word, because
we've got enough words as it is, so let's stick to these few words
which we've fairly well understood.
Sir, look at it the other way, not to be hurt implies having no
resistance; having no resistance means no image; not to be hurt
means, you know, vitality, energy. And that energy is dissipated
when I have images. That energy is dissipated when I compare
myself with you, my image with your image, that energy is
dissipated in conflict, in trying to become your image which I have
projected for myself. That energy is wasted when I am imitating
the image which I have projected myself about you.
So the dissipation of energy is this factor. And when I'm
energetic, which can only take place when there is attention, I'm
not hurt. I don't know whether you are following all this. No? Got
it, sir? Let's go over it, let's understand it differently.
I see, one observes - observation - one observes that one is hurt.
One is hurt because basically one has an image about oneself. And

that image has been built through the various forms of culture,
education, civilization, tradition, nationality, economic condition,
social injustice. That image is the past and therefore knowledge.
Thought, whether it is my thought or the collective thought, has
imprinted on this brain this sense of comparing image with another
image. Obviously. The mother does it, the school teacher does it,
the politician does it, Mao does it, the Red Book, the mythology of
the Christians - you follow, this whole civilization is built on
building this image. And there it is and that image is in the brain,
which is thought. Now as long as one discovers, one understands,
as long as one has an image, there must be hurt.
Q: The image is the hurt, isn't it?
K: Of course, the image is the hurt. All right. Now can the brain
be free of all images and therefore never hurt? That means free of
knowledge of the past as image. Knowledge of the past is essential
to speak a language, but knowledge as the past, as an image put
together by thought which is the 'me' which is the greatest image,
and as long as I have the greatest image in me, you are perfectly
right to put pins into it. And you do.
So can the brain never be hurt. You know, sir, to find this out
for yourself, not because I'm - to find it out for yourself and live a
life in which the brain is never hurt. Then only can you have
relationship. But if in that relationship you are hurting me, and I'm
hurting you, it comes to an end. In that relationship between you
and me there is hurt and that relationship comes to an end, then I
go to find another relationship - divorce you and join somebody
else. And that again is going to be hurt. You follow? We think by
changing a relationship we're going to be completely invulnerable.

But we are all the time being hurt. Right?
Q: If the images are gone, then what is the relationship between
two human beings?
K: I understand. Why are you asking me?
Q: Because you asked.
K: Find out if your image has gone, not because you ask me a
question and I answer it, find out if the images that you have, have
gone, then you will find out what your relationship is with another.
But if I say, look, "It is love", it's just a theory, throw it out, that
has no meaning. But if you say, "Look, I know I'm hurt - all my
life I've been hurt." A series of hurts - don't you know this? A
series of inward tears, series of anxieties. And these images exist.
Our question is, can the brain never be hurt at all? And that you
have to apply, not just talk about it. Go after it, say, "Well have I
got an image". Obviously you have, otherwise you and I wouldn't
be sitting here. And if you have an image, examine it, go into it and
see the futility of analysis. Because that prevents you from action.
Whereas if you say now, "I move with the image". You follow, sir?
That is, move with the image means the thought that is building
this. And thought is knowledge. So can the brain be full of
knowledge in one direction and have no knowledge in the other?
Right? That means, silence in one direction, complete - not
direction, you understand, sir, completely silent and out of that
silence use knowledge. No? You won't see this.
Q: What place is there for establishing relationship?
K: Is there such a state - is there such a state as established
relationship. Go to the Registrar and get married. That establishes
legally a relationship. And what goes on, my god! And what goes

on also, not legally. So it's your torture. So what, now, to come
back, what is the relationship of thought to fear. Right, sir? We
said, thought springs from knowledge of the past, knowledge is the
past, knowledge is past, is the past. In that knowledge, thought has
found security - I know my house, I know you, I am this, I am
conditioned, not conditioned - you follow - I have asserted what I
am in knowledge. Now tomorrow I don't know. I am afraid of
tomorrow. And also I'm afraid of the knowledge which I have of
the past, because in that knowledge I see there is tremendous
insecurity also. Because if I live in the past as most of us do, I am
already dead. And that feeling of living in the past is suffocating
and I don't know how to get rid of it and I'm frightened of that, as
I'm frightened of tomorrow. So I'm frightened of living and I'm
frightened of dying.
So what am I to do, what am I to do with the fears that I have,
future, past - fears? Or is there only one fear, apart from the
physical fear which does affect the brain, psychosomatic fears, all
that - is there only one fear, taking different forms?
Q: Is it the fear of nothingness?
K: Is it the fear of not being. Is that right?
Q: Yes.
K: The fear of not having any image - the being is the image,
isn't it? No? Come on.
Q: Sir,...
K: Wait, we haven't finished this question, it's half past eleven.
Look, sir, we've got two more discussions or dialogues or
conversations, tomorrow and Tuesday, Monday and Tuesday.
Today's nearly over. And we're talking about fear. For the next

quarter of an hour, let's apply our minds and see actually whether
the mind can be free of fear. Right? Both physical fears, with all
their neurotic business, and psychological fears which are much
deeper, more neurotic. For a quarter of an hour let's apply, you
know, get our teeth into it. Because one sees that when there is fear
of any kind, it is the most appalling thing. Right? One lives in
darkness, in a sense of void, disassociated, having no relationship,
everything becomes ugly. No? Fear - fear not only of the past but
also of the future, not only the fears of which one is conscious but
deep down.
Now when you look at this whole phenomena of fear, physical,
psychological, with all their divisions, the various forms of fears,
with all their varieties of fears - right, I hope you're following when you see the whole structure of fear, with all their past, what
is the root of it all? Unless I discover the root of it I'll go on
manipulating the parts, modifying the parts. So I must find the root
of it. What do you think is the root of it - root of all fear, not just
one particular form of fear? Please don't answer me, be sure for
yourself what is the root of it, discover it, unfold it, look at it.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: The gentleman says, this atmosphere is a bore, is politeness I don't want to hurt you and you don't want to hurt me. Therefore
its a form of politeness and it doesn't do anything. Right, sir, is that
so? I don't mind you hurting me.
Q: But relationship is not just sitting here and listening to you.
When I hurt you there would be a relationship between us.
K: What, sir.
Q: When I hurt you there would be a relationship between you

and me.
K: Oh, when you hurt me there'll be a relationship between you
and me.
Q: Of course there will be, because I have destroyed part of...
Q: That's nonsense, this is just reaction. Is it possible for you to
continue on as we have such little time.
K: You see, sir. No, it's not reaction, sir. He's telling you
something - he says, look, we've been through this image business,
we've examined the images, you having one, I having one, you
hurting and I hurting, we've been through all that, it's not
politeness.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: How do you know? You see, how do I know that you have
not washed away your image, if my conceit says you have not.
Who am I to tell you you have or have not - it's up to you.
So let's go back. I want to find out, not the parts or the various
parts or various fears, but I really want to find out the root of it. Is
it not being, which is, the becoming, you follow, the becoming,
that is, I am becoming something, I want to be something I've been
hurt, I want to be free of hurts. All our life is this process of
becoming - aggression is part of this becoming. And the not
becoming is an immense fear, not being is a fear, isn't it - is that the
root of it?
Q: Sir, I try to find the root of fear, I see I can't think about it,
fear, so the mind becomes silent so that I can just feel it as fear,
and then all I feel is a deep, inner tension but I can't get beyond that
point.
K: The gentleman says he can't get beyond the point of tension,

when he examines the root of fear. But why is one tense about it.
Why should I - I just want to find out, why should I have any
tension about it. Because I have a tension, if there is a tension I
want to go beyond it, you know, I'm so eager, greedy. Sir, just
look. You see we think, don't we, each one of us, in terms of
becoming - becoming enlightened, breaking down the images, you
don't listen to my image, I don't listen to your image - you follow?
This whole business is a form of becoming or being. When the
being is threatened, which is not becoming, there is fear. Right?
Why should I, what is there to become? I can understand I can
become more healthy, grow my hair longer, but psychologically
what is there to become? What is becoming? Changing images?
One image for another image? Obviously. But if I've no image at
all and I see the reason of not having logically, and also I see the
truth that image prevents relationship, whether it is the hurt image
or a pleasant image - both, obviously. If I have a pleasant image
about you, you are my friend. If I have an unpleasant image about
you, you're my enemy. So not to have images at all. And work this
out, apply it, not just accept it, but actually apply, enquire and
apply and live it.
Then one finds, if you do apply, do work at it, there is a mind,
there is a brain that can never be hurt, because there is nothing to
be hurt.

SAANEN 7TH PUBLIC DISCUSSION 10TH
AUGUST, 1971
K: I'd like to talk over the question of the observer and the
observed and awareness. This is the last discussion or dialogue.
What shall we talk about apart from what has been suggested.
Q: Sir, could we discuss what yoga really means, and also what
it means in the religious sense.
K: No, no, yoga has quite a different meaning, I'll explain.
Q: What is the difference between intelligence and meditation?
K: Intelligence and meditation. And the other gentleman said,
could we talk about the religious life - the meaning of that word
'religion' is to tie together and could we talk about it, like 'yoga'
which is to tie together.
Q: Could we talk about the purpose of being on this earth?
K: The purpose of being on this earth - god only knows!
Now could we discuss what is a religious life and perhaps in
that, in talking it over, we'll come upon this question of observer
and the observed, intelligence and meditation and all the rest of it.
Shall we? Do you want to discuss that?
Let us dispose of the word 'Yoga'. As it is generally understood,
the word 'Yoga' is generally understood as bringing together, tying
together. I have been told by scholars that the word 'Yoga' doesn't
mean that at all; nor all the exercises and all the racket that goes
with it. What it means is unitive perception, perceiving the whole
thing totally, as a unit, the capacity, or the awareness, or the seeing
the whole of existence as one - unitive perception, that's what it
means, what the word 'Yoga' means. Right, sir?

What is a religious life? I don't know if it interests you at all to
find out what religion means, not the accepted meaning of that
word, belief in some saviour, in some form of god, in some form of
ritual and so on, which is all propaganda, and for me has no value
whatsoever - that's not a religious life. Can we go on from there?
Are you quite sure we all see that fact? A Catholic can be brought
up believing in something, a saviour and so on - as most of the
Christian mythology is based on that. That is, he's been conditioned
from childhood, to believe, baptism, you know, the whole business
of it. And in India and other parts of the world it is the same - from
childhood you are conditioned to believe in something, in god, in
Atman, in Brahman, in a way of life, a religious life, with all its
sanctions and sacrifices, with their rituals, dogmas, priests,
organizations and all that.
Now can we honestly put aside all that - can we? Not become
atheists, not say, well, that's all rubbish, nothing exists, but we are
trying to examine the whole problem of what religion is, what a
religious life is. Can we - if we are at all serious, can we push all
that aside. Have you pushed all that aside? I don't know - it's up to
you. You may not belong to any sect or any group or any
community that believes in god, or doesn't believe in god - that
belief in god or no god, is another form of fear. Right? My wanting
some kind of security, certainty, because our life is so uncertain, so
confused, so meaningless, we want something to believe in. So can
we also put that aside?
The hope that something outside, a superior agency exists - we
are going to enquire, therefore all that must obviously be put aside.
Can we proceed from there? Then what is a religious life, what do

we mean by religion? And what relationship that word or that
feeling, that man has sought or enquired into for millenia, millions
of years he's been searching, searching, what relationship has that
with meditation? Can we go on from there, that is, one's mind has
completely understood the falseness of organized belief, organized
religion, organized church, organized priests, with their saviours,
with their gods, with their rituals, the mind must have understood
completely and gone beyond that.
Then also the mind must go beyond this desire to find
something, this seeking. And that's much more difficult intellectually one can see all the absurdities of religions. But the
mind is seeking, not enquiring but seeking. I hope we see the
difference between the seeking and the enquiring. Seeking implies
going from one group to another, one guru to another, one sect to
another, seeking if you can find happiness, contentment,
satisfaction, in Buddhism, or in Zen, or in Hinduism, you follow seeking. And there are all the people who purvey what you want,
the people who talk a great deal about Buddhism, explain
Buddhism, and you seeking, not knowing, being discontented,
unhappy, miserable, confused, and caught in that trap. And you
say, "At last I've found." Or you join some other sect or become a
Communist and say, at last, there is the real stuff.
So seeking also implies recognition, finding. And seeking
implies recognition in that which you have found. Which means,
when you seek, you've already known, obviously. And therefore
it's not true. So the mind must be free of every form of organized
belief, therefore it cannot possibly belong to any group, to any
person - it is not a personal cult. And we are concerned with

enquiry, therefore the whole question of seeking, finding, is nonexistent.
So we ask, I hope you are, we are sharing together, are we? So
we ask, what is this thing that man has already enquired into, all
his past, you follow, the enquiry if there is or there is not a reality
which is not the product of thought. Thought can invent anything.
There was a man once, I used to know, he experimented with
something which is quite amusing. He picked up a piece of stone
which had a strange shape, and put it on the mantelpiece and every
day he offered to that stone a flower. By the end of the year he was
lost with that flower and that stone - that to him was reality. And
he began just for fun, and then he was caught.
So thought can invent, imagine anything - gods no gods, angels
no angels, you follow, it can produce every form of neurotic
perceptions, ideas, conclusions. So knowing that intelligently, man
then says, how can that thought be quiet, so that the mind is free to
enquire? Because if thought is capable - and it is - of projecting,
inventing, imagining, every form of conclusion, an image in which
the human mind finds security, that security, that image becomes
an illusion, the Saviour, the Brahman, the Atman, the experiences
you have through various forms of discipline and so on.
So the problem then is, can thought be completely still? And
they say you can make it still only through assistance. Please we
are discussing, don't just accept anything the speaker is saying.
Because they all see the necessity of having the mind completely
quiet, because you see, when the mind is quiet it can see much
more, hear much more, see things as they are, not invent, not
imagine.

So can the mind be completely, absolutely still? And it can only
be stilled through, they say, discipline, control, through a particular
form of a system which their teacher has invented. And can a
system, a discipline, a conformity make the mind quiet, really
quiet? Or following a system, practising day after day, day after
day, doesn't it make the mind mechanical? And being mechanical
then you can control it, like any other machine, you can control a
machine. But the brain is not quiet, it has been shaped,
conditioned, by the system which it has practised. Therefore such a
brain, being mechanical, it can be controlled and think such control
is quietness, stillness. Therefore obviously it is not.
So can the mind become completely still without coercion,
without compulsion, without discipline? Discipline being will,
resistance, suppression, conformity, fitting into a pattern, preestablished. If you do that, you are forcing the mind, through
conflict, to conform to the pattern established by the system. So
discipline in the ordinary sense of the word is out. And the word
discipline means to learn, not to conform, not to suppress, not to
control, but to learn.
So can the brain and the mind, the whole structure of the brain
and the mind be completely quiet without any form of distortion by
will, by desire, by thought? So that is the problem. And knowing it,
people have said, "It's not possible", therefore they went in the
other direction, control, discipline, do all kinds of tricks, in Zen, all
that, they sit there, paying attention, to that, watching, watching,
and if you go to sleep you are struck to keep awake. This kind of
tremendous discipline, mechanical, and therefore controllable, and
through it in the hope of achieving an experience which will be

true. Are you taking part in all this or am I just going on by myself.
Q: Why do you say the mind and the brain?
K: Go with me, go along - we'll go into this. But see the
problem first, not just the detail whether the mind is different from
the brain, the brain is different from the mind - just see the whole
problem. Man said, in the religion of history, not that I've read it,
but friends have told me all about it, real scholars - man in his
search for some super transcendental experience said, "Mind must
be absolutely quiet to receive something which it has never
experienced before, which it has never tasted, the smell, the quality
of it". Therefore he said, "Mind must be still." And they've said
there is only one way of making the mind still, force it. And when
there is the operation of will in bringing about the mind to be quiet,
there is distortion. Therefore a mind which is distorted cannot
possibly see what there is. We are sharing together? You're doing
this, you are not exercising will, you're not forcing the mind to be
mechanical, through any form of discipline, system, in which is
included Yoga, all the tricks of Yoga, which is totally wrong.
Those people who teach physical exercise make it into a perfect
racket.
So seeing all this, can the mind become completely still, mind
and brain, because it's very important that the brain be completely
quiet. The brain which is the result of time with all the knowledge,
experience and so on, which is always active to every stimuli,
responding to every movement of influence, impression - can that
brain also be quiet?
Q: Why should it be quiet?
K: Why should it be quiet - I've explained. It must be active

within the field of knowledge, because that is its function. If I
didn't know that a cobra is a most poisonous snake, I'll play with it
and be killed. The knowledge that it is poisonous is self-protection,
therefore knowledge must exist - technologically, in every way.
And that knowledge has been acquired but we're not interfering
with that knowledge, we don't say you mustn't have knowledge, on
the contrary, you must have knowledge of the world, the facts. And
that knowledge is to be used impersonally - I won't go into all that.
So the brain has to be quiet because if it has any movement its
movement will be in the direction of security, because it can only
function in security, whether that security is neurotic or rational or
irrational. So the brain has to have that quality of sensitivity so that
it can function in knowledge, fully, completely, efficiently, sanely,
healthily, and not for my country, for my people, for my family, for
me. But also there must be that quality of sensitivity which makes
the brain completely quiet - that is the problem.
Now have I explained the problem - knowing the explanation is
not the explained. I can give a description of the mountain, but the
mountain is not the description, the picture is not the mountain, the
mountain is there and the picture is something else. So I've only
explained, described, which has nothing whatsoever to do with the
fact. The fact is whether you, listening to this, have put aside every
form of organized belief, every form of wanting more and more
experience. Because if you are desirous of having, wanting more
experience, then the desire is in operation, which is will. So the
fact is this, and if you are interested in pursuing what is a religious
life, you have to do this, which means, a really very, very serious
life, no drugs, not all that silly nonsense - out. And also not seeking

or demanding experience, because when you are seeking
experience, transcendental or whatever you like to call it, you're
seeking because you're bored with the daily experiences of life.
And you want to have an experience which is beyond all this.
And when you are experiencing what one calls a transcendental
or a different level of experience, in that there is the experiencer
and the experienced, there is the observer who is experiencing and
the observed which is the experience. So there is division, then
there is conflict. So you want more, more, more experience. So that
also must be completely set aside, because when you are enquiring,
experience has no place.
So one sees clearly that it is absolutely necessary that the brain,
the mind, the whole body, the whole system, the organism must be
quiet, because as you can see if you want to listen to something,
music, you listen, don't you, your body is still, your mind is still,
you are listening. And if you are listening to somebody who is
talking irrelevantly or relevantly, you listen, and your body
becomes quiet. So the mind, the brain, the body, the whole
organism becomes quiet naturally when you want to understand
something. Look how you're all sitting quietly. You're not forcing
yourself to sit quietly, because you are interested to find out. That
very interest is the flame that makes the mind, the brain, the body
quiet.
So what is meditation in relation to a quiet mind? Can
meditation bring about the quiet mind? Can breathing - you know
Yoga in which also there is a whole system of respiration,
breathing to bring about the quiet mind. Oh Lord! You know, a
perfect idiot can breathe most beautifully, can practise breathing

and do it ecstatically well. But his brain is still very small, he's still
petty, he's still ambitious, greedy.
So the whole question of breathing and sitting quietly is to bring
blood to the brain, nothing else, because the more oxygen you have
in your system the better the capacity to observe. You must have
done all this, played tricks, played with all these things a little bit.
So please don't be caught in the promise by the gurus, the teachers
who teach you Yoga, that you will, through their particular system
attain Nirvana or Heaven or Enlightenment. There are different
systems of Yoga which I won't go into - it's all in India, you can
read about it; but the main, the chief, the principle Yoga is Raja
Yoga which is the king of all yogas, which is nothing to do with
exercises, breathing, which is to see how the mind, the whole
beauty of life is to be understood.
So what relationship has meditation to a quiet mind? The word
'meditation' means measure, to measure, the root meaning of it. To
measure. And thought alone can measure, thought is measurement.
Please, this is important to understand. And the word 'meditation' one shouldn't use that word at all. You see thought is based on
measurement and the cultivation of thought is the action of
measurement, technologically and in life. Without measurement
there can be no modern civilization. Going to the moon, you must
have the capacity to measure, infinitely.
So the question is - if we could only find a different word - can
this measurement which is so essential, which is so obviously
necessary, how can that thought which is measurable, which is
measure, not enter? Let's put it round the other way. When there is
this absolute quietness of the mind and the whole organism,

including the brain, in that measurement ceases, measurement as
thought ceases. And then one can enquire if there is such a thing as
the immeasurable, the measurable and the immeasurable. The
measurable is thought and as long as thought is functioning the
immeasurable is not, cannot be understood. Therefore they said,
control, beat down thought. And the whole Asiatic world went into
the immeasurable, neglecting the measurable.
So what relationship has - we're still using the word 'meditation'
which has a different meaning, as we explained - what relationship
has that to the very still mind? Can thought be quiet? And if it can
be quiet, really, not imaginatively, which means the body, the
mind, the heart in complete harmony, and seeing the truth that
thought is measurable and all the knowledge that thought has
produced is essential, and seeing the truth that thought which is
measurable can never understand the immeasurable. So if one has
gone as far as that, then what relationship has this quality of the
immeasurable in daily life? Are you all asleep? Are you all being
mesmerized by the speaker? What, sir? What?
Q: We can't hear you so well.
K: Oh, you can't hear properly. Can you do something? I'm
sorry you can't hear properly and I believe they can't do anything
about it - it's too hot. I must speak a little nearer - is that better?
Why didn't you tell me earlier?
We're asking, knowing thought is measure, knowing all the
mischief thought has done in human life - the misery, the
confusion, the division between people, you believe and I don't
believe, your god, my god, not my god - thought has brought about
havoc in the world. And thought is also knowledge. So thought is

necessary, and seeing the truth of that and seeing that thought can
never investigate the immeasurable, therefore thought can never
experience it as an experiencer and the experienced. So when
thought is absolutely quiet, then there is a state or a dimension in
which the immeasurable has its own movement. Now what
relationship has that to daily life. Because if it has not any
relationship, then I will live a life very carefully measuring my you follow - my morality, my activity but very limited according to
the measurement of thought.
So what is the relationship of the unknown to the known? What
is the relationship between the measurable and that which in not
measurable? There must be a liaison, and that is intelligence.
Intelligence has nothing whatsoever to do with thought. You may
be awfully clever, very good at argument, very learned, have
experienced, lived a tremendous life, been all over the world,
investigating, searching, looking, accumulated a great deal of
knowledge, practised Zen, Hindu meditation; but all that has
nothing whatsoever to do with intelligence. Intelligence comes into
being when the mind, the heart and the body are really harmonious.
Therefore - follow this, sir - the body must be highly sensitive,
not gross, not eating, drinking, all the rest, sex, all that makes the
body coarse, dull, heavy. Therefore you have to understand all that.
The very seeing the fact of that makes you eat less, gives the body
its own intelligence. If there is an awareness of the body which is
not being forced, all the rest of it, so the body becomes very, very,
very sensitive, like a beautiful instrument. The same with the heart,
which is, that it is never hurt and can never hurt another. That is
innocency of the heart, not to hurt and not to be hurt. And the

mind, having no fear, demanding no pleasure - not that you cannot
enjoy the beauty of life, beauty of the tree, beauty of the beautiful
face, looking at children, the flow of water, at the mountains, the
green pastures - there is great delight in that. But that delight when
pursued by thought becomes pleasure.
So the mind has to be empty to see clearly. So the relationship
between the immeasurable, the unknown and the known is this
intelligence, which has nothing whatsoever to do with Buddhism,
with Zen, with me or with you, absolutely nothing to do with
authority, or tradition. Now have you got that intelligence? That is
the only point that matters. Then that intelligence will operate in
this world morally. Morality then is order, which is virtue, not the
virtue or the morality of society, which is totally immoral.
So that intelligence brings about order, which is virtue, and
therefore a thing that is living, not mechanical. Therefore you can
never practise being good, you can never practise trying to become
humble. When there is that intelligence, that intelligence naturally
brings about order, and the beauty of order.
Now, so this is a religious life, not all the foolery around it.
Now have you, listening to the speaker, have you understood this understood not verbally or intellectually, but actually seen the truth
of this? Therefore if you see the truth of it, it will act. If you see the
truth that a snake is dangerous, the truth, you act. If you see the
danger of a precipice, the fact, the truth of it, you act. If you see the
truth of arsenic, the poison, you act. Wait! So do you see this, or do
you still live in the world of ideas? If you live in the world of ideas,
conclusions, then that's not truth, that's just a projection of thought.
So that is the real question, whether listening to this, as you

have listened for the last three weeks, in which all the varieties of
human existence, suffering, pain and pleasure, sex and immorality
and all the rest of it, social injustice, national divisions, wars,
whether you see the truth of this and therefore there is that
intelligence which operates, not me operating. When you say, "I
must be myself", which is the slogan or the cliche of modern
generation, which is, I must be myself, when you examine those
words "I must be myself", myself, what is myself? A lot of words,
a lot of conclusions, traditions, reactions, memories, a bundle of
the past. And you say, "I want to be myself", which is too childish.
So after having listened to all this, is there that awakening of
that intelligence? And if there is that awakening of that intelligence
then it'll operate, then you don't have to say, "What am I to do?"
And as perhaps there's been a thousand people here during these
three weeks that have listened - if they really lived that, do you
know what's going to happen? We'd change the world. We'll be the
salt of the earth.
Q: Sir, do I understand correctly that what the mind has to see
deeply is the truth of the poison of seeking security. Is that what
you said?
K: Part of that, sir.
Q: And the difficulty seems to be that this part doesn't see, so
the mind doesn't see it, and in order for the mind to see something,
there has to be quiet - it seems like a vicious circle.
K: No sir. First of all, why should a mind be quiet, why
shouldn't it go on chattering? When the mind is chattering, you
know, carrying on, you can't see anything very clearly, can you?
You can't listen to anybody clearly. If you were looking at a

mountain, seeing the beauty, seeing it, your mind has naturally to
be quiet. Which means you have to give attention to that moment,
to seeing. That's all. That is, if you see, if you listen to the fact that
thought is measure, that thought has divided human beings, that
thought has brought about wars - if you see the truth of it, not the
explanation, the justification, all that - just see the fact, what
thought has done - obviously to see that fact your mind must be
quiet. No?
So it is not a vicious circle at all, sir.
Q: May I ask you a question: you were talking about beauty of
the mountains and the beauty of that cloud. I wonder about looking
at something horrible.
K: Yes, you're always talking about the beauty of the
mountains, hills and pastures, and also there is the ugly things of
life, the refugee camps, in India, the Palestinian wars, the negro
conflict, the ghettoes, the slums, poverty. Right? Can you also look
at that with the same attention, with the same quality of mind that
observes the dark and the light? Now just listen carefully, observe
the dark and the light, the slum and the not slum. Can you watch
that, can there be an awareness in which the division between that
and that doesn't exist? Is there an awareness in which the division
between poverty and riches doesn't exist - the division, not the fact
that there is not the division, with all its injustice, immorality, all
that - but the fact, an awareness, in which this division doesn't
exist? That is, can the mind observe the beauty of the hill, and the
squalor and not prefer or incline one opposed to the other, so that
there is an awareness in which choice doesn't exist? You can do
this. Not that poverty should go on - you would do something,

politically, socially and so on. But the mind, freed from division,
from this classical division between the rich and the poor, between
beauty and ugliness, and all the rest of it, the opposite.
Somebody has written me a question, that will we please stop at
eleven fifty because many of us have to catch a train.
Q: Sir, I'd like to ask you, is there a difference for you between
thought and speculation, sometimes.
K: Is there a difference between thought and speculation. Why
should there be a difference between thought and speculation?
Who is speculating - isn't thought speculating? Isn't thought
theorizing that there is god, that there is no god, how many angels
can sit on a pinhead and so on, it is the whole business of thought
to speculate - there's no division, it's the same.
Q: You can be aware objectively of a tree, of a mountain, of a
person. Can thought observe its own movement?
K: Yes, is there an awareness of thought watching itself.
Q: I don't like the word 'watch'.
K: All right, an awareness of itself. Now wait a minute, just
look, have you understood the question? You can be aware of the
tree, of the hill, of you sitting there - there is an awareness of that.
Is there an awareness that you are aware? That you are aware that
you are being aware. Please see the question. You can be aware of
the tree, the cloud, the colour of your shirt or whatever women
wear, and you can be aware objectively, and also aware of how
your thought is operating. But is there an awareness of being
aware? When you are aware of the tree as an observer, is that
awareness - the tree is there and you are aware of that tree. You
then become the observer and that becomes the observed, and he

says, "That's not it". In that there is a division, as the observer and
the observed. Wait a minute. Same with the cloud, same with you
sitting there and the person speaking sitting on a platform and
observing. In that too there is a division. In this too there is the
observer, watching you, the observed - in that there is division.
One can be aware of thought - I'm going on step by step, sir,
thought, being aware of thought. In that also there is a division, the
one who is aware separating himself from thought.
Now you're asking a question, which is, does awareness know
or is aware of itself, without an observer? Of course not, the
moment there is no observer, there is no awareness of being aware.
Obviously, sir, that is the whole point. The moment I am aware
that I am aware, I'm not aware. Remain with it, sir, two minutes remain with it. The moment I am aware that I am humble, humility
is not. The moment I am aware that I am happy, happiness is not.
So if I am aware that I am aware, then that is not aware, in that
there is division between the observer and the observed. Now
you're asking a question, which is, is there an awareness in which
division as the observer and the observed comes to an end.
Obviously awareness means that. Awareness means the observer is
not.
Q: I am aware of the tree...
K: Wait, sir, look at it. When you look at a tree there is space
between you and the tree - wait, sir, wait sir, not when you are,
we're beginning step by step, go step by step. When you look at
that tree there is a distance between you and the tree. There is the
space, there is division. That division takes place when there is the
observer, the observer which has an image of that tree as the oak,

or the pine. So the knowledge, the image, separates the observer
from the observed, as the tree. Now can you, please look at it, can
you look at that tree without the image? Then if you look at that
tree without the image, without saying that is an oak, that is
beautiful, not beautiful, like or dislike. Then what takes place, what
takes place when there is no observer but only the observed? Go
on, sir, tell me what takes place - I'm not going to tell you.
Q: Union.
K: The gentleman says, there comes about union. Union
between what?
Q: I realize that union...
K: No, union - union can only exist when there is the observer
and the observed, when the two come together.
Q: Oneness.
K: Oneness means also the same thing.
Q: Awareness.
K: Let's invent, speculate.
Q: When I am aware of the tree...
K: I'm coming to that, sir - please.
Q: As it comes together you have peace.
K: No, Madam, it is not that.
Look, I said to you, please listen to it step by step. I said to you,
when you look ordinarily at a tree, there is the division between
you and the tree. You're the observer and the tree is the observed.
That's a fact. You with your image, with your prejudices, with your
hopes and all the rest of it, that is the observer. Therefore as long as
that exists as the observer, there must be division between you and
the tree. When the observer is not but only the object, what takes

place - what takes place - don't imagine it, do it.
Q: There is a stillness, we get still. Thought doesn't work any
more. We become the tree.
K: You become the tree - my god, I hope not. (Laughter) I
become the elephant.
Q: There is neither the observer nor the observed.
K: Do please listen. Do it. Look at a tree and see if you can look
at it without any image. That's fairly easy. But to look at yourself
without an image, to look at yourself without the observer, that's
much more difficult, because what you see is unpleasant or
pleasant, you want to change it, you want to control it, you want to
shape it. So can you look at yourself without the observer, as you
can do, if you look at the tree? Which means, look at yourself with
complete attention. When there is complete attention there is no
image. It's only when your mind is thinking, I wish I'd a better
meal, or I'm going to so and so and you're looking at the tree, there
is inattention.
Q: Sir, am I wrong if I say that we are in a state of awareness all
the time.
K: Oh, no.
Q: But we...
K: No, sir, please sir. That is another speculation of thought,
that we are aware all the time, we are in a state of awareness only
at moments we go off to sleep. The moments we go off to sleep,
the moments when we are inattentive, that is what is important, not
when we are aware. I think I'd better stop, because it is nearly a
quarter to twelve. Any more? What?
Q: Are we aware of the infinite affection you express in

translating intelligence as love?
K: Are we aware of the infinite affection when you said,
intelligence and its relationship to life. Are we aware of the infinite
affection - it's up to you, sir.
Q: Sir, when I am aware of my image and experience it, isn't
that awareness in itself.
K: When I'm aware of my image, does the image exist - it
doesn't.
Q: Then that is awareness in itself.
K: That's right. Awareness in itself, without any choice, is that
awareness.
Sir, what is important in all this is, not what you have heard but
what one is learning. Learning is not accumulation of knowledge.
When you go away from here you'll have various ideas about
awareness, love, truth, fear and all the rest of it - ideas. And those
very ideas are going to prevent learning. But if you are aware a
little bit, then you're learning. And then intelligence can operate
through learning in daily life.

BROCKWOOD PARK 1ST PUBLIC TALK 4TH
SEPTEMBER 1971
K: What shall we talk about?
Q: Children.
K: Perhaps we can talk about that a little later. But what I think
would be worthwhile, would be to talk over together this question
of violence, which is spreading and getting worse and worse, right
through the world, which is really a part of this whole human
conditioning. And whether man can ever be free, not only of the
superficial, environmental, economic, social conditioning of their
particular culture, but also much deeper conditioning, which is the
whole collective sorrow, violence and the destructive despairs and
their activity of which most of us, I think, are unconscious. It's like
a cloud which one has inherited, in which one lives, and apparently
one finds it tremendously difficult to free oneself from it all. I think
that would be worthwhile if we could talk over that together. Shall
we? Would that interest you?
Because as one observes, wherever you go, all over the world,
the superficial cultures don't penetrate very deeply into human
consciousness. But the deep roots of the great clouds of sorrow - I
don't like to use the word 'evil', but that destructive violence - the
great deal of antagonisms, mischief, misery, conflict - it seems to
be so deeply rooted in all of us and whether one can be utterly free
of them. And if that is essential, then how is one to set about it?
Can we go into this? Because superficially we may be highly
cultured, polite, slightly indifferent, callous, but deeply most of us,
I think, are unaware that there is a great inheritance of this vast,

complex, conflict, sorrow, misery, and fear. And if one is aware of
it and one is conscious of it at all, is it possible to be entirely free
of it, so that the mind is a totally different kind of instrument? I do
not know if you have thought about it at all, or have thought that
the superficial conditioning is so important that one is always
struggling against it. And if one has been through it and put it
away, then there are all these deep layers, unconscious for the most
part, and how is one to become aware of those and whether it is at
all possible to be completely rid of them?
As this is such a small group comparatively, perhaps we could
discuss how to be aware of these terrible things which man has
inherited or cultivated - it is there. Whatever the explanations be,
the fact is that we are deeply violent, but we are caught in sorrow. We don't have this every day, thank god (referring to the roar of
planes), this is for your welcome! - And there is this cloud of fear
and obviously they bring about in action a great deal of mischief,
confusion. I think that is fairly obvious, and how is one to be aware
of all this, and is it possible to go beyond all that?
And religions throughout the world, the organized religions,
have forced man - not forced - but have implied that, have laid
down certain sanctions, certain rules, certain disciplines, certain
attitudes and beliefs, and those have not, obviously, resolved the
human suffering, human fears, and deep-rooted anxieties, guilts,
and all the rest of it. So we can brush all that aside, all the religious
beliefs and hopes and fears, completely set aside all that - and one
does, the more you think about it, the more one is aware of what is
taking place in the world and the nature of the religious
organizations with their heads and gurus and teachers and saviours

and all their mythology. It becomes too childish and immature.
Now if one has set aside all that because one has understood it and
seen the futility of it, the falseness of it and are free of all that, then
certain facts remain, like sorrow, violence, fear and a great anxiety,
uncertainty - those remain.
Now, how is one, if I am aware of all that, conscious of it, how
am I to be free of all that, so that I have a different kind of brain,
different kind of action, different kind of attitude towards life,
different way of living? The more one is intelligent, enquiring and
intellectually aware of all this, one not only becomes very, very
serious, but also there is the demand that the mind must be totally
free of all this mess and muck that human beings have created and
carried about with them endlessly. So if that is the problem, and I
think that is really the basic problem, not that there is not social
injustice and reformation in all that, that there is not poverty, wars,
violence, the division between nationalities - all that. All that can
be solved, I feel, when human beings really understand this whole
business of existence. And then they can tackle it, tackle all the
confusion, the conflicts, the wars, the social injustice, the divisions
of people and so on, from a different dimension.
And the human mind wants to find that dimension. It has to find
it to solve all this misery. So how am I, or you, to end all this, if
you are serious, not playing with words, not speculating, not
indulging in theoretical suppositions and ideas and hypothesis, but
actually confronted with this, confronted with this human
suffering, not only yours, but human suffering - the fears, the
confusion, the uncertainties, the demand for constant security. The
demand for psychological security is much deeper than

physiological security, and because we want psychological
securities, we give over all our thought and our hopes to some
teacher, to some saviour, to some belief, to some outside agency.
Now how shall I, knowing all this, understand and be free of this
constant effort, struggle, misery? All right, shall we go into that.
Shall we discuss it, talk it over together - that means share it
together.
How am I, or you, to be aware of that? What does this
awareness or perception mean? How do I know that I am in
sorrow, that human beings - not only me, but every human being in
the world, of which I am part - how do I know or am aware that
there is this sorrow? Is it a verbal recognition, or is it an acceptance
of an idea that there is sorrow of which I am part? Or is there
conscious awareness that sorrow is a fact. Are we going together?
When I say to myself there is a tremendous sorrow in the world, of
which I am part, because I am the world and the world is me that's a fact. It's not an idea, it's not a sentiment, it's not an
emotional assertion, it's an absolute fact, that I am the world and
the world is me. Because I have made this world - you have made
it, we are responsible for it. All my thoughts, my activities, my
fears, my hopes are the hopes and fears of you, of the world. There
is no division between the world and me. The community is me,
the culture is me and I am that culture, so there is no division. I
don't know if you see that and if you feel it. All that is going on in
the world, in the Middle East and the Far East, between Pakistan
and another nation - you know, all that - it's part of me, we are
responsible for all that. And how am I, knowing I am the world and
there must be a radical revolution in the world, not throwing

bombs, that leads nowhere, but a revolution in the very psyche
itself, in the mind itself, so that one lives differently, thinks
differently, acts totally in a different manner altogether? How am I,
knowing I am the world and the world is me, how am I to free the
mind that is responsible for all this - the mind being thought? It is
thought that has brought this about - the division between people,
the wars, the structure of religious belief - thought has produced all
this.
And also thought has put together the technology that makes for
the convenience of everyday existence - the bathroom, the
electricity, the railway, the technological knowledge that makes
one go to the moon - it is thought that has done all this - hasn't it?
Obviously. Thought which has gathered so much information, so
much knowledge, how is that thought to be free from the whole
structure and nature of sorrow and fear, and yet function
efficiently, with sanity in the field of knowledge, without bringing
about division between man and man, thereby creating conflict,
antagonism between man and man? You see the problem? At least,
the problem which exists. Isn't thought responsible for all this? Isn't
thought responsible for your saviours, for your beliefs, for saying
you are an Englishman, or a Dutchman, or a German or a Russian?
Isn't it thought that divides the Hindu from the Moslem and all
that's going on in the world, in the East? And the war in Vietnam is
the result of thought, carefully planned - thought is responsible for
all this - isn't it? Do you say thought is not responsible?
So thought is responsible, and yet we have to think very clearly.
How then is thought to prevent this division? Because where there
is division there is conflict, not only outwardly but inwardly. Am I

making my problem clear? Not my problem, it's your problem, it's
the problem of human beings because one sees what thought has
done - cunning, extraordinarily capable, how it has gathered
technological knowledge which cannot possibly be put aside - and
yet thought has made the division between man and man: you are a
Moslem, I am a Communist. You are a Buddhist, I am a Hindu. It
is thought that has brought about violence, and thought is not love.
So one has to have the clarity of thought in function and yet be
aware that thought breeds all the divisions in the world and misery.
So how am I and you in this enquiry to be aware of the whole
implication of thought which is the measurable, and also a
dimension in which thought as measure doesn't exist at all? Are we
following each other? No?
First, isn't it clear, what thought has done in the world? Right?
Thought in science, the whole development of technology, and
what it has done in the world, both beneficial and destructive?
Thought has put together a series of religious structures and
beliefs, as superstitions, mythology and saviours - no? How
thought has divided people in religious beliefs. And how thought
has invented means of destruction of human beings. So thought has
done all that, hasn't it? And thought must be exercised to function
at all. Now how is thought to function beautifully, efficiently,
healthily and not create division between people?
Q: When there is no fear.
K: Just a minute - don't let's say when there is no fear, let's see
the problem first.
And thought is the collective memory of man, the collective
memory from which there is the response as thought, which is the

past. No? If you had no memory you couldn't think. And thought is
the past. It may project in the future but it still has its root in the
past and from there it functions. We see that in operation, and then
I say to myself: that is necessary, but why does thought divide
people as you as a Christian, Buddhist, violent, all the rest of it,
and me something else?
So can thought function happily, easily, effectively and yet not
create division between man and man? You see my point? It's not
my point, please. Why should I be conditioned as a Muslim which
is the result of thought, and you conditioned as a Communist,
which is the result of thought - you believe in a saviour, and I don't
believe in a saviour, which is again the result of thought. The few
who think, or the majority who think that violence can only
produce a sociological change, and somebody else saying that is
not the way. So thought is always creating divisions. Right? And
where there is division there is conflict. So what is the function of
thought? Right?
Knowing that thought can only function in the field of
knowledge, and can thought invent or come upon a different
dimension, in which there is no division at all created by thought?
Right? Are we getting somewhere together? Good. At least a few
of us. We may be crazy, but let's get together. Because personally I
am terribly interested in this, because I have seen in India, in
America, all over Europe, in Australia and other parts of the world,
thought has created such marvellous things and yet thought has
brought about such misery, such confusion, enormous amount of
sorrow. So seeing all that I ask myself: what is the function of
thought? Can thought operate in one direction completely and be

totally silent in another, so that there is no division, it doesn't create
a division? So after having put that question to myself - and I hope
you are putting it to yourselves - is it possible for thought to divide
itself? You understand? For thought to say "I won't go beyond
that," I will function, thought will function healthily, normally in
all the technological world, in the knowledge, action and daily
existence, and not enter into that dimension in which there is no
division at all? Is that possible for thought to separate itself like
that? Or we are putting the wrong question altogether.
Can thought see its own limitations, and seeing its own
limitations it brings about a different intelligence into being? If I
see my own limitation, if thought sees its own limitation, has it not
already discovered - not thought - , is there not a different kind of
intelligence in operation? When thought sees its own limitation,
then is there not an awakening of intelligence which is above and
beyond thought? Please are we communicating with each other, or
not at all?
Q: Yes.
K: You know communication means sharing, not accepting.
Q: When thought is seeing itself that must not be thinking.
K: I don't know sir.
Q: Hasn't thought come up with systems to destroy itself?
K: No, sir, first see our difficulty, this is an enormously difficult
problem, don't let's find an easy answer. See the enormous
implication of this. Man has lived by thought. We exercise thought
every day, every minute, to go home, to catch a train, to catch the
bus, to write, talk, to communicate, to function. We must have
thought and if we have no thought there is no action, you can't live.

You can't destroy thought. To destroy thought implies a thought
which is superior and says "I must destroy my lower thought". It's
all within the field of thought, thinking. Do you understand? This
is what the Asiatics have done, the Indians; they have said: thought
is very limited, there is a superior thought, the Atman, the
Brahman, the thing above; keep thought silent and then the other
will operate. And in the very assertion of that is thought - isn't it?
Here you say the soul - it is still part of thought.
So thought has produced this extraordinary world of
technology, which thought uses for the destruction of human
beings and for the convenience of human beings. It is thought that
has invented the saviours, the myths, the gods, it is thought that has
produced violence, it is thought that becomes jealous, anxious,
fearful.
So is there a field which is not measurable by thought and can
that field operate in the field of thought, without thought breaking
up into divisions, fragmentations? Sirs, you see, if thought is
operating all the time, then the mind is functioning with the
knowledge which is the past - knowledge is the past. I can't have
knowledge of tomorrow. And knowledge is thought. If that is the
only way to live, always within the field of thought, then the mind
can never be free. Right? And so man must always live in sorrow,
always have fear, always live in division, in fragmentation,
therefore in conflict. And realizing that, man has said there must be
an outside agency - as God, who will help me to overcome all this
fragmentation of thought. But that God, that Brahman, that Atman,
is still the invention of thought, or subtle forms of hope, which is
again thought seeking security, not finding security in this world,

invents or believes or projects an idea which it calls god, which is
secure. Right? So I see this.
So if thought is to be the only field in which human beings can
live, then human beings are doomed. This is not my invention, this
is what is actually going on. Then I ask myself, is it possible for
thought to operate where it is absolutely necessary, healthily,
normally, objectively, efficiently, sanely and be totally silent in
every other direction? Do you understand?
Now how is that possible? How is it possible for thought to
function there, where it is absolutely necessary, in the most clear,
objective, non-confused way, and at the same time live
harmoniously in a dimension in which thought doesn't enter at all?
You have got my problem? Have I made the problem clear?
Because the human mind demands freedom - freedom from
agonies, guilt, suffering, misery, confusion, these endless wars and
violence. It demands it. And thought cannot produce freedom. It
can invent the idea of freedom, but that's not freedom. So the
human mind must find the answer. And it can only find out the
answer when it has understood the nature of thinking and seen its
capacity, how thought is measurable and find a freedom, a
dimension, a state of the immeasurable in which thought doesn't
function at all.
You see, this is what's called meditation. People have done this,
but again their meditation is part of the furthering of thought. They
say, "I must sit quiet, there must be control, my thoughts must be
controlled". Knowing the limitation of thought, they say, "I must
control it, I must discipline it, I must hold it in check, don't let it
wander". They discipline themselves tremendously, but they

haven't got the other dimension, because thought cannot enter into
that at all.
So man has done everything! You follow? The really serious
ones, the people who have really, deeply, enquired into this, not the
casual people. And yet thought has been their major instrument and
therefore they have never solved this problem. They have invented
things. They have speculated. And poor fools like us accept these
speculations, the philosophers, teachers - you follow? - the whole
gamut of them. And I ask myself - and I hope you are asking it how can this happen? Obviously there must be a different kind of
meditation, a different kind of perception, that is seeing and not
evaluating. To see the operations of thought, all its inward,
outward movement, just to observe it, without giving any direction,
forcing it in any way, just to observe it completely, without any
choice. That is a different kind of perception. We see, but we
always give it a direction. We say "This must not be", or "This
should be", "I shall overcome it". All that is the old way of
responding to any action, to any feeling, to any idea. But to
observe without any direction, without any pressure, without any
distortion, is that possible at all? To see myself as I am, without
any condemnation, saying, "I'll keep this and I'll reject that" - can
you do it? Then perception has a different quality. Right? Then it
becomes a living thing, not the repetitive pattern of the past.
So in the very act of listening, as we are doing now, in that very
act of listening, you see the truth of it, that to perceive really there
must be no directive or persuasion or compulsion: just to observe.
In that observation you will see that thought doesn't enter at all.
You are following? Which means in that perception, in that seeing,

there is complete attention. Where there is no attention there is a
distortion. Now when you are listening to this, if you see the truth
of it, that acts. Are we meeting each other now?
Q: Sir, in that state one sees oneself absolutely powerless and
also there is a moral that thought always feels and knows its own
power.
K: So what?
Q: Thought always enters where there is interest, fear and
anxiety.
K: Are you saying, sir, that thought - but isn't fear the result of
thought, the result of anxiety - thought has produced fear - no?
Q: Sometimes it comes unexpectedly.
K: That may be, whether it is unexpected, but it's thought that
has produced fear - no? Thought has produced this immense
sorrow.
Q: What about children's fears?
K: Surely, isn't it based on their lack of security? Children need
complete security, and the parents cannot give that complete
security because they are interested in their own little selves. They
are quarrelling, they are ambitious, they are this, they are that - do
you follow? - so they cannot give completely the security that the
child demands, which is love.
And so we come back to the same question. Thought has
produced fear, there is no question about it. Thought has produced
the aching loneliness in oneself. Thought has said, I must fulfil, I
must be, I am little - I must be big. Thought has brought about this
jealousy, this anxiety, this guilt, thought is responsible for it.
Thought is that, thought is guilt, not thought makes for guilt,

thought is guilt. So how can I observe myself and the world, of
which I am part, observe without any interference of thought in
that observation, and therefore out of that observation a different
action which doesn't produce fear, regrets and all the rest of it?
Therefore I must learn to observe myself and the world and my
action quite differently. There must be a learning of observation in
which thought doesn't interfere at all. Because the moment thought
interferes it gives it a distortion, it gives it a bias. Perception is in
the present; you can't perceive tomorrow. You perceive now and in
that perception, when thought interferes, thought is the response of
the past and therefore it must distort the present. It's logically so.
Q: Surely, to be aware we have to think.
K: Wait, wait, look at it, what does awareness mean? I am
aware that you are sitting there, and I am aware that I am sitting up
here - unfortunately - and I am aware that I am sitting on a chair on
a red cover, etc. I am aware. I perceive. I see. Then thought says,
that is red, then thought says, I am a better person because I am
talking, than somebody who is sitting below. Thought gives me
prestige - you follow? Thought is doing all this - is that awareness,
or is it merely the continuous movement of thought? Just go
slowly, sir, can you see a tree without the operation of thought,
isn't that it? Can you? Can't you? Can't you see a tree without the
image of a tree? The image being the thought, thought that says:
that is an oak.
Q: It is not blind, if it can see.
K: Ah, no - I'll go on - no, fortunately I am not blind. Sir, do
look at it, do consider it. To look at a tree, to observe a tree, what
takes place? There is the space between the observer and the tree.

Right? There is distance, then there is the knowledge of that tree the botanical knowledge, the knowledge of like and dislike of that
tree. So I have the image of the tree. The image looks at that tree,
and is there a perception without the image? The image is thought,
thought is the knowledge of that tree. So when there is a perception
with the image there is no direct perception of the tree. So is it
possible to look at the tree without the image? There objectively it
is fairly simple, but it becomes much more complex when I look at
myself without any image about myself. Is that possible?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: First see sir, we will come to that, go slowly step by step.
Please do it as we are talking, you will find out.
That is, is there an observation of myself without any image
about myself? Because I am full of my images - I am this, I am not
that, I should be this, I should not be that, I must become, I must
not become. They are all images. And I am looking at myself with
one of the images, not with the whole group of images.
So then, what is looking? You follow? What then is seeing if
there is no image? Do you understand my question? If I have no
images at all about myself - you know, which one has to go into
very, very deeply if you want to - then what is there to see? There
is absolutely nothing to see and one is frightened of that. Then one
is absolutely nothing; but one can't face that, therefore one has
those images about oneself. So, let's go back.
The human mind demands freedom, absolutely. Even in Russia
they are demanding freedom, and the powers that be are pushing
them out. So freedom is essential, it is politically demanded. But
you don't demand freedom from all images. So thought has created

these images, for various sociological, economic, cultural reasons,
and more. And these images are measurable: the greater, the lesser,
the more, the less. And one asks can thought observe without
distortion? Obviously it can't. When it observes there is a distorting
factor in thought, because thought is the response of the past. So is
there an observation without the interference of thought? That
means without the interference of any image. You have to find this
out, it is not a question of just accepting or believing, just find out
if you can look at your wife or husband, the tree or the cloud, the
person sitting next to you without any image.
Q: Is there such a thing as an unconscious image one might not
be aware of?
K: Yes, there is. Of course. Now how can I be aware of the
unconscious images that I have. Right? Please, listen to my
question: how am I to be aware of the many, many unconscious
images that I have stored up, man has stored up.
Q: Krishnaji, as long as one is trying to be aware, one creates
things to be aware of.
K: That's what I am saying. You cannot try to be aware, you
cannot determine to be aware, you cannot - it is not the result of
exercising will to be aware. Either you see or you don't see. Either
you listen to what we are talking about now, or you don't listen.
But if you listen with your image then of course you don't listen at
all.
So the question really is very interesting - I can understand the
images that I have consciously - conscious images, I can do this some silly nonsense, all the superficial knowledge that I have, that
is fairly simple and fairly clear. But the deep, hidden images that

have such powerful influence on the whole way of life. How am I
to be aware of these unconscious hidden images? How do you
propose?
Q: We find out by how we behave, by how these images come
up.
K: You find out how you behave, through your behaviour. Now
wait, go slow. You'll find out your unconscious images through
your behaviour.
Q: Or sometimes in sleep.
K: You will see it, sir, you will see it in a minute. Which means
what? Through my behaviour I begin to discover my unconscious
images that have been stored up. One image after another, you
follow? I behave towards you differently and towards another
differently, because you are bigger and more powerful, have
greater prestige than the other man. Therefore my image of you is
greater - and the other I despise, my image. So it means going
through one image after another, you follow? Or is there a central
fact that creates these images consciously as well as deeply? You
are following? If I could find that out, then I don't have to go
through image after image after image, or go through the discovery
of the images through dreams. I don't know if you are following
my question.
You see if through my behaviour I discover my unconscious
images, that's a form of analysis, isn't it? Of course, it's a form of
analysis. Now will analysis resolve these images? These images
are created by thought - analysis is thought. So through thought I
hope to destroy the images that thought has created. So I am caught
in a vicious circle. So how do I deal with this? You say through

dreams. Are your images revealed through dreams? And what are
dreams? Why should you dream at all? Isn't that another form of
analysis? I don't know if you are following. I dream, and dreams
are a continuation of my daily activity, aren't they? No? Do please
investigate it together. I lead rather a messy life, uncertain,
confused, miserable, unhappy, lonely, frightened, comparing
myself with somebody else who is more beautiful, more intelligent,
more this and more that, and that's my life during the waking hours
and when I sleep that goes on. And I dream the things that I have
been through, all the continuation that I have been living during the
daytime, no? And if I examine myself, if there is a revelation of
myself through dreams, that's a form of analysis. Therefore I say,
look what I am doing. I am depending on dreams to reveal the
images hidden deep down in the cave. And the dependence on
dreams makes me less and less awake during the waking hours.
No?
Q: Thought and sub-thought create images and these are useful
on a certain level.
K: We've said that, that's why there are useful images which
must function, which we must have, there are highly dangerous
images which one must totally abolish, obviously. That's what the
whole discussion is about this morning.
Q: Is there not only one question, not whether thought can be
silent when necessary, but can there be only silence?
K: Ah, that means, sir - can there be silence from which thought
can operate?
Q: It's not a question of whether thought can operate or not, but
can there be only silence?

K: Can thought be completely quiet and function, awaken when
it is necessary?
Q: It's not the question whether thought can function where
necessary, but can it be silent?
K: Can thought be completely silent. Who is putting that
question? Is thought putting that question?
Q: Obviously.
K: So thought is asking itself whether it can be quiet. No, don't
laugh please, do look at it, do look at it.
So thought is asking itself whether it can be quiet. How will you
find out? Can it do anything to be silent, right sir - it can't can it? If
it does, it is not silent. So can thought be quiet? Which means, can
thought say to itself - I must be quiet? Then that's not quiet. Then
what is quietness, which is not the product of thought. Right? Is
there a silence which is not the result of thought? Which means,
can thought come to an end by itself, without asking to come to an
end? Isn't that implied when you listen to something, when you see
clearly? When you are completely attentive, in that attention there
is silence, isn't there? Completely attentive, which means your
body, your nerves, everything is attentive. Then in that attention
the observer as thought doesn't exist.
Q: That only happens in moments of great danger?
K: You mean to say when there is a crisis. Must one live in
crises all the time? What an appalling idea, isn't it? In order to be
quiet I must have a series of crises and thereby hope to be silent.
That's too complicated!
Q: May I say that silence happens from within.
K: How does it happen? And can one function - please listen to

this - can one function from silence - you follow? You put that
question please. What is silence first of all, how does it come, and
is there a functioning, that is living daily life out of silence?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: I can't assert anything, that there is an awareness all the time.
I don't know. You don't know.
Q: But it seems to be, it's just that it changes all the time.
K: Now wait. I must find out sir. I only know, we only know
one thing, that thought is perpetually in operation. And when
thought is in operation there is no silence. There is no awareness as
we discussed, as we pointed out. Awareness, or perception implies
a state of seeing in which there is no image whatsoever. Until I find
that out whether it is possible to see, observe, without any image, I
can't state anything else. I can't state there is an awareness, there is
a silence. Is it possible for me, in daily life, to observe my wife, my
child, you know, everything, without a shadow of an image? Find
out sir. Then out of that attention there is silence. That attention is
silence. And it is not the result of practice - of course which is
again thought.

BROCKWOOD PARK 4TH PUBLIC TALK 12TH
SEPTEMBER 1971
Shall we go on with what we said we were going to talk about this
morning? I think it was that we should talk over together the
question of meditation, various forms of yoga, and the appalling
number of groups there are who are practising the most incredible
things.
You know, as one travels all over the world, there is not only
the explosion of population, pollution and the heavy weight of
bureaucracy, tyranny, not only of the politicians and dictators but
also the tyranny of the priests, the gurus, those who say they have
attained enlightenment and so on. Observing all this, and the
appalling condition - conditions of poverty and the ugliness of
man's relationship to man, it becomes obvious that there must be a
total revolution. A different kind of culture must come into being.
The old culture is almost dead and yet we are clinging to it, and
those who are young, revolt against it, but unfortunately haven't
found a way or a means of transforming the essential quality of the
human being which is the mind. And unless there is a deep
psychological revolution, mere reformation on the periphery will
have little effect. And this revolution, this psychological
revolution, which I think is the only revolution, is possible through
meditation.
Meditation is the total release of energy, and that is what we are
going to talk over together this morning. Now, the word
'meditation', the root meaning of that word, is to measure. And the
whole western world is based on that idea of measurement; and in

the East they have said measurement is maya, illusion, and
therefore one must find the immeasurable. The two went apart,
culturally, socially, and intellectually and religiously. And as
meditation is quite a complex problem, we have to go into it rather
slowly and approach it from different angles, bearing in mind all
the time that psychological revolution is absolutely necessary for a
different kind of world, society, to come into being. I do not know
how strongly you feel about it. Probably most of us, being
bourgeois, comfortable on our little income, our little family, and
so on and so on, would rather remain as we are and not be
disturbed; but events, technology, and all those things that are
happening in the world, are producing great changes outwardly;
but inwardly most of us remain more or less as we have been for
centuries upon centuries, and that revolution can only take place at
the very centre of our being. And this revolution requires a great
abundance of energy. And meditation is the release of that total
energy. We are going to talk over that.
You see, first of all, how is one to have this quality of energy
which is without friction? We know mechanical energy which is
friction, mechanically and the friction which produces in us
energy, through conflict, through resistance, through control and
all the rest of it. So there are two different kinds of energy,
mechanical which is friction, and is there any other kind of energy,
which has no friction whatsoever, and therefore completely free
and immeasurable? I think meditation is the discovery of that,
because unless one has great abundance of energy, not only
physically but much more psychologically, intellectually, our
action will never be complete. It will always produce friction,

conflict, struggle. So observing the various forms of meditation
throughout the world, including Zen, the various forms of yoga
brought over from India, and the various contemplative groups as
monks and so on, in all that, if one observes it very closely, there is
the idea of control, acceptance of a system, and practising a
repetition of words which is called mantra, and various forms of
breathing, hatha yoga and so on.
So first of all let us dispose of them altogether, by investigating
not accepting what they say, investigating what they have said
themselves, seeing the truth or the falseness of it. First of all there
is this repetition of words: those words, sentences, mantras, a set of
phrases given by a guru, a teacher, initiated, paying ten pounds,
fifteen pounds or a hundred pounds so that you learn a peculiar
phrase repeated by you secretly. Probably some of you have done
that and you know a great deal about it. And that is called mantra
yoga, brought over from India. I don't know why you pay a single
penny to repeat certain words from somebody who says "If you do
this you will achieve enlightenment - or you will have a certain
quiet mind" and all the rest of it. You know when you repeat a
series of words constantly, whether it is Ave Maria or various
Sanskrit words or - what is the latest drink? - coca cola - and when
you repeat that over and over and over again, obviously your mind
becomes rather dull, and you have a peculiar sense of unity,
quietness, and you think that will help to bring about clarity. You
can see the absurdity of it altogether: because, first of all why
should you accept what anybody says about anything, about these
matters, including myself? Why should you accept any authority
about inward movement of life. We reject authority outwardly - if

you are at all intellectually aware, observe politically, other things,
you reject it. But apparently we accept authority of somebody who
says "I know; I have achieved; I have realized." The man who says
he has, the man who says he knows, does not know. Right? The
moment you say you know, you don't know. Because what is it you
know? Some experience which you have had, some kind of vision,
some kind of enlightenment - I dislike to use that word
'enlightenment'. And once you have experienced that, you think
you have attained some extraordinary state, some extraordinary
vision, and that is past, you can only know something which is
over and therefore dead. So when all these people, this gang of
people I like to call them, come over and say they have realized, do
this or do that, for so much money, then it is obviously so absurd.
So we can dispose of that.
Then we can also dispose of this whole idea of practising a
system, a method. When you practise a method in order to achieve
enlightenment, or bliss, or have a quiet mind, or achieve a state of
tranquility, when you practise a method, whatever it is, it obviously
makes the mind mechanical. You repeat over and over again
certain gestures, breathing, you know all that business, repeat,
practising awareness, which is quite absurd. Then this practice not
only implies suppression of your own movement, of your own
understanding, conformity, and the endless conflict involved in
practising a particular system - and the mind likes to conform to a
system because then it gets crystallized and it is easy to live that
way. Right? So can we dispose now of all systems of meditations?
Then what is meditation? Is it control of thought? And if it is,
who is the controller of thought? The controller of thought is

thought itself, isn't it? Our whole culture both in the East and West
is based on control - control of thought, and concentration in which
only one thought can be pursued to the end. I hope we are meeting
each other, are we? Shall I go on? Why should one control at all?
Control implies imitation, conformity. Control implies the
acceptance of a pattern as the authority, according to which you are
trying to live - that pattern set by the society, the culture, by the
priest, by somebody whom you think has knowledge,
enlightenment and so on. And according to that pattern one tries to
live, suppressing all one's own feelings and ideas and trying to
conform. So in that there is conflict, and conflict is essentially
wastage of energy. So concentration, which so many advocate in
meditation, is totally wrong. You are accepting all this, or are you
just listening out of boredom? Because we'll go into this question,
whether thought without any form of control, control being
suppression, conformity, conflict, whether thought can function
when necessary, as in knowledge, in action, and be completely still
at all other times? Do you follow my question? That is the real
issue: whether the mind which is cluttered up with so many
activities of thought and therefore uncertain, and trying to find
clarity in that confusion, forces itself to control, conform to an
idea, and therefore brings about more and more confusion within
itself. I want to find out whether the mind can be quiet and only
function when necessary, as in knowledge? Are you following my
question? Am I making myself clear?
And control obviously, because it implies conflict, is a great
waste of energy. Please, that is important to understand because I
feel meditation must be a releasing of energy in which there isn't

the slightest friction. And how is a mind to do this? How is it to
have such energy in which every form of friction comes to an end?
And in enquiring into that, one must understand oneself
completely. There must be self-knowing totally. I must know
myself completely, and is that possible? Not according to any
psychologist, philosopher, teacher, or the pattern set by a particular
culture, but know myself right through, both at the conscious level
as well as at the deeper levels, totally. So, when there is
knowledge, understanding of oneself completely, then there is the
ending of conflict, and this is meditation.
Now how am I to know myself? I can only know myself in
relationship. I can observe or the observation of myself takes place
only when there is the response, reaction, in relationship; and there
is no such thing as isolation, though the mind is all the time
isolating itself in all its activities, building a wall round itself in
order not to be hurt, in order not to have any discomfort,
unhappiness, any trouble. It is isolating itself all the time in its
activity, self-centred activity and I want to know myself as I want
to know how to go from here to a particular town, clearly,
watching everything that is involved in myself, my feelings, my
thoughts, my motives, conscious or unconscious. How is this
possible? You know, knowing oneself has been - the Greeks have
said it, the Hindus have said it, the Buddhists have said it, 'know
yourself', but apparently that is one of the most difficult things to
know oneself. And we are going to find out this morning how to
look at ourselves, because once you know yourself completely, that
completeness prevents all friction, and therefore out of that comes
this quality of energy which is totally different.

So to find out how to observe oneself one must see what we
mean by observing. When we observe objective things like trees,
clouds, the things outside of us, there is not only the space between
the observer and the observed, physical space, there is also space
of time. Isn't there? When you look at a tree - please do listen to
this - when you look at a tree there is not only physical distance but
there is also psychological distance. There is the distance between
you and the tree, the distance created by the image as knowledge that's an oak tree, elm, the image, and that image between you and
the tree separates you. You don't become the tree, you don't
identify yourself with the tree, but when the quality of the mind of
the observer becomes without imagination, without the image
which is imagination, then there is quite a different relationship
between the observer and the observed. Right? Have you ever done
this, looked at a tree without a single word of like or dislike,
without a single image and have you noticed then what takes
place? Then for the first time you see the tree as it is, and you see
the beauty of it, the colour, the depth, you know, the vitality of it.
That's fairly easy to observe a tree, another person, but to observe
oneself, that way, that is to observe without the observer - are you
following all this? So one must find out who is the observer, what
is the observer.
I want to watch myself, I want to know myself as deeply as
possible. And I watch myself. And what is the observer who is
watching? What is the nature of that observer, the structure of that
observer? That observer is the past, isn't it - the past knowledge,
what he has remembered, collected, stored up, the past being the
culture, the conditioning - that is the observer, who says, this is

right, this is wrong, this must be, this must not be, this is good, I'll
keep on, this is bad, I mustn't have. So the observer is the past, and
with those eyes of the past we try to see what we are. Then we say,
I don't like this, I am ugly, or, this I will keep - you follow? All
those discriminations, condemnations take place. Now can I look at
myself without the eyes of the past? Then is there an observer?
Then there is only the observed, there is no observer. Please just
see this. I am envious, or I over eat, I am greedy, and the normal
reaction is, I must not over eat, I must not be greedy, I must
suppress, you know all the rest of it that follows. So in that there is
the observer trying to control his greed, his envy, and all the rest of
it. Now when there is an awareness of greed, of your over eating,
or whatever it is, without the observer, what takes place? Are we
following each other, are we doing this thing? No? I over eat, my
greed, I am very greedy. Can I observer that greed without giving it
a name as greed, because the moment I name it I have already
fixed it in my memory, as greed, which says, I must get over it, I
must control.
So is there an observation of greed without the word, without
justifying it, without condemning it? Which means, can I observe
this thing called greed without any reaction whatsoever? To so
observe is a form of discipline isn't it, not imposed by any
particular pattern and therefore conformity, suppression, and all the
rest of it, but to observe anything, observe the movements that are
in myself, greed, envy, over eating, anger, jealousy, anxiety,
smoking, drinking, you follow, the whole series of actions, without
condemning, justifying or naming, just to observe. Then you will
see, if you so observe, the mind is no longer wasting energy. It is

then aware, and therefore it has energy to deal with that which it is
observing. All right? Are you all asleep?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Quite right sir. That's it. But once you understand the whole
mechanism of it, it doesn't become difficult. Once you see the truth
of it, sir, that truth, that fact, acts. One can do that at the conscious
level. There are a great many unconscious responses, motives,
inclinations, tendencies, inhibitions, fears, how is one to deal with
all that, the hidden accumulations? Must one go through analysing
layer after layer, exposing all that through dreams? You follow?
How is all that to be exposed totally so that knowing oneself
becomes complete? You have understood my question?
Now how is this possible? Apparently it cannot be done by the
conscious mind. I can't investigate consciously the unconscious,
the hidden - can you?
Q: No.
K: Don't say 'no' - see the difficulty of it, because I don't know
what is hidden and the hidden may intimate through dreams but the
dreams need to be interpreted and all the complications - and all
that will take a lot of time, won't it?
Q: I think it is possible under certain drugs to know myself with
analysis - there is no conflict.
K: If one takes LSD or various forms of drugs that helps a great
deal, because in that there is no conflict at all. So you please take
drugs. Does it really, does any drug, LSD, marijuana, any of them does it really expose the totality of the content of consciousness, or
does it bring about chemically a certain state of mind which is
totally different from the understanding of oneself? These drugs - I

have never taken them - they have taken them in India a great deal
- I have watched many people there. I have also watched students
in universities in America, and many, many other people who have
been taking various forms of drugs, LSD, marijuana, you know I
don't know what all the other names are - psychedelic drugs. If you
have observed, these drugs do affect the mind, the brain cells
themselves. They destroy the brain. If you have talked to one or
many of those who have taken drugs, they can't reason, they can't
pursue a logical sequence of thought - and the doctors and the
scientists are beginning to say it does destroy the very structure of
the brain cells. Not only LSD but marijuana, which is much more
dangerous than LSD because that leaves a toxic condition in the
brain cells and is much more difficult to get rid of. In India they
have taken drugs for millions, for thousands of years and they are
the most ignorant people who have taken drugs. And all the socalled intellectuals in India have denied it, said don't do it, touch it.
I am not asking you not to take it, it's up to you, but when you see
the effect of it, on people - they have no sense of responsibility,
they think they can do anything they like, many, many hospitals
are full of these people who mentally are unbalanced through
drugs.
We are talking of something which is non-chemical. If LSD or
any drug can bring about a state of mind in which there is no
conflict that would be a marvellous thing. And at the same time
complete responsibility, sequence of thought, and action.
Q: (inaudible)
K: Beg your pardon, I cannot hear. Am I coming to a
conclusion? Is that what you are saying sir?

Q: I find your sequence of thought illogical. And also I cannot
see how you can argue against drugs if you have not any
experience of taking drugs.
K: Ah wait. How can you argue against drugs if you have not
taken drugs yourself? Must you go through various forms of
experiences, must you get drunk in order to understand sobriety?
Must you get angry in order to find out what it is not to be angry?
Must you over eat in order - and so on and so on. Can't one observe
without going through all the human mischief? So I am saying, we
are asking, how is one to expose the whole content that lies hidden,
at one glance - not through a series of dreams, not through analysis,
all that implies time and wastage of energy? How is one to observe
the whole content of consciousness, the obvious and the hidden,
the superficial and the profound, at one look? You understand?
Because this is an important question. I want to understand myself
- myself being all the past, the incidents in my present life, the
experiences, the hurts, the anxieties, the guilt, the various fears how am I to understand all that without a single analysis, without
going through all the dreams and intimations and so on, to
comprehend all that immediately? To understand all that
immediately gives immense energy. You follow? Am I making
myself clear?
Now how do you do that? Is that an impossibility? And we have
to ask the impossible question to find a way out of it. Unless we
ask the most impossible question we shall always be dealing with
what is possible, and what is possible is very little. I don't know if
you meet this. So I am asking the most impossible question, which
is to have this whole content of consciousness exposed and

understand it, see it totally without time, which means analysis,
exploration, investigation and seeing layer after layer, layer after that's all a waste of time. So how is the mind to observe this whole
content with one look? Is that possible at all?
If that question is put to you as it is being put now, what is your
response? If you are honest, if you are really listening to that
question, what is your response? You obviously say, I can't do it.
Right? You obviously really don't know how to do it. Right? You
really don't know, do you? Listen, please do listen. You don't
know, do you? Or are you waiting for somebody to tell you?
(Laughter) No, please, this is much too serious. Do listen to this. If
I say to myself, I don't know, am I waiting for somebody to inform
me? Am I expecting an answer? Then when I am expecting an
answer, somebody to tell me, then I already know. Right? Are you
following this? When I say, I don't know, I really don't know - I am
not waiting for anybody to tell me, I am not expecting a thing
because nobody can answer it. So I actually don't know. Right?
Now, what is the state of the mind that says, I really don't know? I
can't find it in any book, I can't ask anybody, I can't go to any
teacher, priest, I really don't know. When the mind says, "I do not
know" - what is the state of the mind? Please do listen, don't
answer me yet. Do look at it because we always say, "We know". I
know my wife, I know mathematics, I know this, I know that. We
never say, "I really don't know." And I am asking, what is the state
of the mind that actually, honestly says, "I don't know"?
Q: Blank.
K: Not blank - we'll take a little time, have a little patience with
yourselves, don't verbalize immediately. When I say, I don't know

and I really mean I don't know, what is the state of my mind? It has
no answer. It is not expecting anything from anybody. Right? It is
not waiting, it is not expecting. So what happens? What is the state
of the mind that says, I don't know? Is it not completely alone?
Right? It is not isolated. Isolation and aloneness are two different
things. Aloneness, in that quality of aloneness there is no influence,
there is no resistance, it has shed itself from all the past, it says, I
really don't know. Therefore the mind when it says, I really deeply
don't know, has emptied itself of all its content. Right? Have you
understood this?
Q: Yes.
K: Have you? No, please, please.
I do not know how to expose the whole content of my
consciousness. I thought I could through analysis. I thought I could
through drugs. I thought I could do it by following some teacher,
philosopher, psychologist or analyst. I have tried all those ways
and I see I am still caught in the net of all that, and I discard all
that, because that doesn't help me to know myself totally, and I
don't know what to do. Do you follow? I don't know what to do. I
have asked the impossible question and the impossible question
says, "I don't know". Therefore the mind empties itself of
everything it has - every suggestion, every probability, every
possibility. So the mind is completely active, empty of all the past,
which is time, analysis, the authority of somebody. So it has
exposed all the content of itself by denying the content. Do you
understand now? No? Has somebody understood this or am I
talking to myself?
So, as we said, meditation can only begin with the

understanding of myself totally, that is part of meditation, part of
the beginning of meditation. Without understanding myself the
mind can deceive itself, it can have illusions. That is, being
conditioned by a particular culture in which one has been brought
up, Hindu, Christian or Communist - if you are a Hindu you will
see according to your conditioning, the god, the illusions, the
myths, the falseness, the lies; if you are a Christian you are
conditioned according to your particular culture, you will see
Christ, you will see this and you will see that. If you are a Hibrew you know all the rest of it, the same phenomenon goes through.
And so when you know your conditioning and are free of it then
there is no possibility of any kind of illusion. And that is absolutely
essential because we can deceive ourselves so easily. So when I
investigate into myself I see that the consciousness emptying itself
of all its content through knowing itself, not by denying anything,
but by understanding the whole content, that brings about a great
energy which is necessary, because that energy transforms
completely all my activity. It is no longer self-centred and
therefore cause of friction. I don't know if you have followed this?
So meditation is a way of putting aside altogether everything
that man has conceived of himself and of the world. You
understand? So he has a totally different kind of mind. Meditation
also means awareness - awareness both of the world and of the
whole movement of oneself, without any choice, to see exactly
'what is', without any distortion, to see. And distortion takes place
the moment you bring in thought. Right? But thought has function,
absolute function, but when there is an observation, when thought
interferes with that observation as image, then there is distortion,

then there is illusion. So to observe actually what is, in oneself and
in the world, without any distortion, and to so observe, a quiet
mind is necessary. You understand? A very still mind is necessary.
And one knows that it is necessary to have a quiet mind, therefore
they say, discipline. Do you understand? Control it, and there are
various systems to help you to control. And all that is friction. So if
you want to observe passionately, with intensity, the mind
inevitably becomes quiet. You don't have to force it. I don't know
if you follow it? The moment you force it, it is not quiet - it is
dead. Whereas if you see the truth that to perceive anything you
must look, and if you look with prejudice you cannot see. If you
see that, your mind is quiet.
So a quiet mind, a still mind, is necessary - not through any
sense of conformity, discipline, enforcement. Right? Now what
takes place in a quiet mind? Because we are enquiring not only into
that quality of energy in which there is no friction, but also we are
enquiring how to bring about a radical change within oneself, and
oneself being the world and the world is oneself, the world is not
different from me, I am the world. It's not just an idea, theory, but
an actual fact that I am the world and the world is me. So if there is
a radical revolution, a change in me, it will inevitably affect the
world because I am part of the world.
And in this enquiry into what is meditation I see that any
wastage of energy is caused by friction in my relationship with
another. And is it possible to have a relationship with another in
which there is no friction whatsoever? And that is possible only
when I understand what love is, and the understanding of what love
is, is the denial of what love is not. Love is not - as we went into

that the other day - jealousy, ambition, greed, self-centred activity,
you know, obviously all that is not love. So, when in the
understanding of myself there is the total setting aside of all that
which is not love, then it is.
So I have found in this examination, observing - the observation
takes a second, the explanation takes a long time, the description
takes pages but the act of observation is instantaneous. I have
found in this observation no system, no authority, no self-centred
activity, therefore no conformity, no comparison of myself with
another. And to observe all this the mind must be extraordinarily
quiet. If you want to listen to what is being said this morning, just
now, you have to listen, haven't you? But you can't listen, if you
are thinking about something else, if you are bored with this, I
should get up and go. But to force yourself to listen is absurd, but if
you are really interested in it, passionately, intensely, then you
listen completely, and to listen completely the mind must be quiet.
It is as simple as that.
Now, all this is meditation; not just one act, sitting for five
minutes by yourself, cross-legged, breathing properly - that's not
meditation, that's self-hypnosis. I want to find out what is the
quality of the mind that is completely still, and also what takes
place when it is still. Do you understand my question? I've
observed, I've recorded, I've understood, I've watched, I've finished
with that, but there is another enquiry which is, what is the state of
the mind, the brain cells themselves? The brain cells store for selfprotection the memories that are useful, memories that are
necessary, memories that might lead to danger. Haven't you
noticed this? I suppose you read a lot of books, personally I don't, I

only read detective stories, therefore I can look, I can look into
myself and find out, watch myself, not according to somebody just watch. I am asking myself what is the quality of such a mind,
what has happened to the brain? The brain records, that is its
function. It functions only through memory, so that it is protected,
safe, secure, otherwise it can't function. The brain may find
security in some neurosis. But it has found security there. It has
found security in nationalism, in a belief, which are all various
forms of neurosis, in the family, in having possessions. The brain
must be secure to function, and it may choose that security in
something that is false, unreal, illusory, neurotic. So, when I have
examined myself thoroughly all this disappears. There is no
neurosis, no belief, no nationality, no desire to hurt anybody, nor
record all the hurts. So the brain then is a recording instrument
without thought using it as the 'me' in operation.
So meditation implies not only the body being still but also the
brain being quiet. Have you ever watched your brain in operation your own thinking, why you think certain things, why you react to
others, how when you feel lonely, desperately lonely, unloved,
nothing to rely on, no hope - you know, this tremendous sense of
loneliness, though you may be married have children and live in a
group but there is still this feeling of complete solitude - emptiness
rather, not solitude. And seeing it one tries to escape from it, but if
you remain with it, not escape from it, just look at it completely
without condemning it, trying to overcome it, or escaping from it,
just observe actually as it is then you will see that what you
considered loneliness ceases to be.
So the brain cells record, and thought as the 'me', my ambition,

my greed, my purposes, my fulfilment - all that comes to an end.
Therefore the brain and the mind become extraordinarily quiet.
They only function when necessary. Therefore your brain, your
mind enters into quite a different dimension, in which there is no
description, because description is not the described. What we have
done this morning is description, explanation, but the word is not
the thing. When we realize the word is not the thing then one is
free of the word. It is only the quiet mind can find out the
immeasurable - not find out. The quiet mind then enters into the
immeasurable, because all our life is based on thought which is
measurable. It measures god, it measures its relationship with
another through image, it tries to improve itself according to what
it thinks it should be. So we live in a world of measurement,
unnecessarily, and with that world we want to enter into a world in
which there is no measurement at all.
So meditation is the seeing 'what is' and going beyond it, seeing
the measure and going beyond the measure. And what happens,
what takes place when the brain, the mind and the body are really
quiet, harmonious? Harmonious, which is the mind, the body and
the heart are completely one. Then one lives a totally different kind
of life. All right, sir. Any questions?
Q: What is intuition?
K: What is intuition? One has to be awfully careful of that
word. Because I like something unconsciously and I say I have an
intuition about it. Don't you know all the tricks one plays upon
oneself through that word? Why do you want an intuition? When
you see things as they are, why do you want an intuition? To
observe things actually in yourself as they are without any

distortion, why do you want any form of a hunch, intimation? We
are talking of understanding oneself.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Sir, self-knowledge is endless, you can't measure selfknowledge, can you? I have got so much, I have understood today
so much, I'll understand so much tomorrow.
Any other questions?
Q: When one is aware of one's sexual appetites they seem to
disappear and can that awareness, attention, be maintained all the
time?
K: Just watch the danger of this question. When I am aware of
my sexual desires they seems to disappear. So awareness is a trick
which will help me to make things which I don't like disappear. I
don't like anger therefore I am going to be aware of it and perhaps
it will disappear. But I do like my fulfilment, I want to become a
great man, and I won't be aware of that. I believe in god but I won't
be aware of all the dangers involved in that, because it separates
people, destroys people, tortures people - not god only but worship
of the state. So I am going to be aware of the things that are most
unpleasant but I am going to be unaware of all those things which I
am going to keep. Awareness is not a trick, it is not something that
will help you to dissolve things that we don't want to keep awareness means to observe the whole of the movement of like and
dislike, of your suppressions. If you are a Victorian you don't talk
about sex, you suppress it but you go on thinking about it. But if
you are modern you are permissive - to be aware of all that.
Q: Sir, can we by understanding our minds be aware when we
are asleep?

K: Can we be aware of what goes on when we are asleep? Oh
Lord! Sir, this really is a complex question. How am I to be aware
that I am asleep? Is there an awareness of what's going on during
sleep? So to find that out, am I aware during the day of everything
that's going on - aware not only outwardly of what's going on, the
mischief of the politicians, the wars, the admiralty, the army, my
relationship with my wife, husband, friend, girl, boy? Am I aware
during the day of all the movements that are going on within me,
the reactions? If I am not aware during the day how am I going to
be aware at night when I sleep? And if I am aware during the day do you understand what it means - watching, attentive, watching
how much you eat, what you say, what you think, motives, aware
of all that during the day, then during the night have you anything
to be aware of? Do please find out. Then if you are not aware
except that which is going on as a recording as the brain, what
takes place? I have spent my day actively, being aware, watching
what I eat, what I think, what I feel, how I talk to others, jealousy,
envy, greed, violence - I have watched all that, been completely
aware of all that. Which means I have brought order there - order,
not according to any plan, but order, because I have lived a
disordered life of not being aware. Now when I have become
aware of all this, in that awareness there is order. Then when I go
to sleep, when the body goes to sleep, what takes place? Generally
the brain tries to bring about order while you are asleep because
during the conscious waking hours you have lived a disordered
life. Because the brain needs order - I don't know if you have not
watched it - it can't function properly, healthily if there is no order.
So if during the day there has been order, at night when you sleep

the brain is not trying to bring order, trying through dreams,
through intimations and so on, it becomes quiet. It may record but
it is quiet, and so there is a possibility of renewal, possibility of a
mind no longer fighting, struggling, and therefore the mind
becomes extraordinarily young, fresh, innocent - innocent in the
sense it won't hurt and will not be hurt. Isn't that enough for this
morning? Yes?
Q: When a man has a message, the relationship between a man
and his message is usually a teacher and his teachings. The teacher
often has followers, and his message is a system - why don't you
consider yourself a teacher and your message a system?
K: Generally a teacher has a message and followers - a teacher.
Why don't you consider yourself as a teacher and have followers? I
have made it fairly clear, haven't I? Don't follow anybody and don't
accept anybody as a teacher except you yourself become the
teacher and the disciple for yourself.

BROCKWOOD PARK 7TH OCTOBER 1972
CONVERSATION WITH DAVID BOHM 'ON
INTELLIGENCE'
Bohm: About intelligence, I always like to look up the origin of a
word as well as its meaning. It is very interesting; it comes from
inter and legere which means 'To read between'. So it seems to me
that you could say that thought is like the information in a book
and that intelligence has to read it, the meaning of it. I think this
gives a rather good notion of intelligence.
Krishnamurti: To read between the lines.
Bohm: Yes, to see what it means. There is also another meaning
given in the dictionary which is: mental alertness.
Krishnamurti: Yes, mental alertness.
Bohm: Well, this is very different from what people have in
mind when they measure intelligence. Now, considering many of
the things you have said, you would say intelligence is not thought.
You say thought takes place in the old brain, it is a physical
process taking place, electrochemical; it has been amply proved by
science that all thought is essentially a physical, chemical,
electrical process. Then we could say perhaps that intelligence is
not of the same order, it is not of the order of time at all.
Krishnamurti: Intelligence.
Bohm: Yes, intelligence reads this thought, sees the meaning of
it. I thought we could start off with the question, there is one more
point, you said that it is essential for the old brain to see its limits,
so that it stays within its limits and doesn't make trouble. Of course
thought tends to keep on worrying a question unless it is deeply

seen that the question has no meaning, thought may keep on it at it.
Now I think one of the questions which arises is this: if you say
thought is physical, then the mind or intelligence or whatever you
want to call it, seems different, it is of a different order. Would you
say there is a real difference between the physical and intelligence?
Krishnamurti: Yes. Are we saying that thought is matter? Let us
put it differently.
Bohm: Matter? I would rather call it a material process.
Krishnamurti: All right; thought is a material process, and what
is the relationship between that and intelligence? Is intelligence the
product of thought?
Bohm: And it raises many question which I think would be
important for science.
Krishnamurti: Is intelligence the product of thought?
Bohm: Well I think we can take that for granted, it is not.
Krishnamurti: It is not. Why do we take it for granted?
Bohm: Simply because thought is mechanical.
Krishnamurti: Thought is mechanical, that is right.
Bohm: Intelligence is not.
Krishnamurti: So thought is measurable; intelligence is not. And
how does it happen that this intelligence comes into existence? If
thought has no relationship with intelligence, then is the cessation
of thought the awakening of intelligence? Or is it that intelligence,
being independent of thought, and therefore not of time, exists
always?
Bohm: That raises many difficult questions.
Krishnamurti: I know.
Bohm: I would like to put this in a framework of thinking that

one could connect with any scientific views that may exist.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: Either to show that it fits or doesn't fit. So you say
intelligence may be there always.
Krishnamurti: I am asking - is it there always?
Bohm: It may or may not be. Or it is possible that something
interferes with intelligence?
Krishnamurti: You see the Buddhists, and the Hindus have the
theory, if I am right, the ancient Hindus, that intelligence, or
Brahman, exists always and is covered over by illusion, by matter,
by idiocy, by all kinds of mischievous things created by thought. I
don't know if they would go as far as that.
Bohm: Well, yes; we don't actually see the eternal existence of
intelligence.
Krishnamurti: They say peel all this off, that thing is there. So
their assumption is that it existed always.
Bohm: There is a difficulty in that, in the word 'always'.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: Because 'always' implies time.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: And that is just the trouble. Time is thought - I would
like to put it that thought is of the order of time, or perhaps it is the
other way round, that time is of the order of thought. In other
words thought has invented time, and in fact thought is time. The
way I see it is, that thought may sweep over the whole of time in
one moment; but then thought is always changing without noticing
that it is changing physically - for physical reasons, that is.
Krishnamurti: Yes.

Bohm: Not rational reasons.
Krishnamurti: No.
Bohm: The reasons do not have to do with something total, but
they have to do with some physical movement in the brain;
therefore...
Krishnamurti: ...they depend on environment and all kinds of
things.
Bohm: So as thought changes with time its meaning is no longer
consistent, it becomes contradictory, it changes in an arbitrary way.
Krishnamurti: Yes, I'll follow that.
Bohm: Then you begin to think, everything is changing, I
change, everything changes, and one begins to think "I am in
time". When time is extended it becomes vast, the past before I
was, further and further back and also forward in the future, so you
begin to say time is the essence of all, time conquers everything.
First the child may think, "I am eternal", then he begins to
understand that he is in time. The general view that we get to is,
that time is the essence of existence. This I think is not only the
common sense view but also the scientific view. It is very hard to
give up such a view because it is an intense conditioning. It is
stronger even than the conditioning of the observer and the
observed.
Krishnamurti: Yes, quite. Are we saying that thought is time,
thought is measurable, thought can change, modify, expand? And
intelligence is of a different quality altogether?
Bohm: Yes, different order, different quality. And I get an
impression of this thought with regard to time. If we think of the
past and the future, we think of the past as becoming the future; but

you can see that that can't be, that it is just thought. Yet one gets
the impression that past and future are present together and there is
movement in another way; that the whole pattern is moving.
Krishnamurti: The whole pattern is moving.
Bohm: But I can't picture how it moves. In other words it is
moving in a perpendicular direction to the direction between past
and future. At first sight I begin to think that movement is in
another time.
Krishnamurti: Quite, quite.
Bohm: But that gets you back into the paradox.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that is it. Is intelligence out of time and
therefore not related to thought, which is a movement of time?
Bohm: But still thought must be related to it.
Krishnamurti: Is it? I am asking. I think it is unrelated.
Bohm: Unrelated? But at first sight it seems there is some
relation in the sense that you distinguish between intelligent
thought and unintelligent thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes, but that requires intelligence to recognize
unintelligent thought.
Bohm: But when intelligence reads thought, what is the
relationship?
Krishnamurti: Let us go slowly...
Bohm: And does thought respond to intelligence? Doesn't
thought change?
Krishnamurti: Let us be simple. Thought is time. Thought is
movement in time. Thought is measurable and thought functions in
the field of time, all moving, changing, transforming. Is
intelligence within the field of time?

Bohm: Well, we've seen that in one sense it can't be. But the
thing is not clear. First of all, thought is mechanical.
Krishnamurti: Thought is mechanical, that is clear.
Bohm: Secondly, in some sense there is a movement which is of
a different time.
Krishnamurti: Thought is mechanical; being mechanical it can
move in different directions and all the rest of it. Is intelligence
mechanical? Let's put it that way.
Bohm: I would like to ask the question, what does
mechanicalness mean?
Krishnamurti: All right: repetitive, measurable, comparative.
Bohm: I would say also dependent.
Krishnamurti: Dependent, yes.
Bohm: Intelligence - let us get it clear - intelligence cannot be
dependent on any condition for its truth. But it seems that in some
sense intelligence doesn't operate if the brain is not healthy.
Krishnamurti: Obviously.
Bohm: In that sense intelligence seems to depend on the brain.
Krishnamurti: Or is it the quietness of the brain?
Bohm: All right, it depends on the quietness of the brain.
Krishnamurti: Not on the activity of the brain.
Bohm: There is still some relation between intelligence and the
brain. I understand this because we once discussed this question
many years ago, when I raised the idea that in physics you could
use a measuring instrument in two ways, the positive and the
negative. Like an electric current, you can measure the electric
current by the swing of the needle in the instrument, or you can use
it in what is called the Wheatstone bridge, where the reading you

look for is a null reading; a null reading indicates harmony, balance
of the two sides of the whole system as it were. So if you are using
the instrument negatively, then the non-function of the instrument
is the sign that it is working right. Could we say the brain may
have used thought positively to make an image of the world...
Krishnamurti: ...which is the function of thought, one of the
functions.
Bohm: The other function of thought is negative, which is to
indicate non-harmony.
Krishnamurti: Yes, non-harmony. Let us proceed from there. Is
intelligence dependent on the brain - we come to that point. Or
when we use the word 'dependent' what do we mean by that?
Bohm: It has several possible meanings. There may be simple
mechanical dependence. But there is another kind: that one can't
exist without the other. If I say, "I depend on food to exist", it
doesn't mean that everything I think is determined by what I eat.
Krishnamurti: Yes, quite.
Bohm: So I propose that intelligence depends for its existence
on this brain, which can indicate non-harmony, but the brain does
not have anything to do with the content of intelligence.
Krishnamurti: So if the brain is not harmonious, can intelligence
function?
Bohm: That is the question.
Krishnamurti: That is what we are saying. It cannot function if
the brain is hurt.
Bohm: If the intelligence doesn't function, is there intelligence?
Therefore it seems that intelligence requires the brain in order to
exist.

Krishnamurti: But the brain is only an instrument.
Bohm: Which indicates this harmony or disharmony.
Krishnamurti: But it is not the creator of the other.
Bohm: No.
Krishnamurti: Let us go into this slowly.
Bohm: The brain doesn't create intelligence but it is an
instrument which helps intelligence to function. That is it.
Krishnamurti: That's it. Now if the brain is functioning within
the field of time, up and down, negatively, positively, in any way,
in that movement, or through that movement of time can
intelligence operate? Or must that instrument be quiet for the
intelligence to operate?
Bohm: Yes. I would put it possibly slightly differently. The
quietness of the instrument is the operation of intelligence.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that is right. The two are not separate.
Bohm: They are one and the same. The non-quietness of the
instrument is the failure of the intelligence.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: But I think it would be useful to go back into questions
which tend to be raised in the whole of scientific and philosophical
thinking. We would ask the question: is there some sense in which
intelligence exists independently of matter? You see that some
people have thought that mind and matter have some separate kind
of existence. This is one question that comes up. It may not be
relevant, but I think the question should be considered in one way
or another in order to help to make the mind quiet. The
consideration of questions that cannot be clearly answered is one of
the things that disturbs the mind.

Krishnamurti: But you see, sir, when you say, will thought help
the awakening of intelligence? When you put it that way it means
that, doesn't it? Thought and matter and the exercise of thought and
the movement of thought, or thought saying to itself, "I will be
quiet in order for the awakening of intelligence". Any movement of
thought is time, any movement, because it is measurable, it is
functioning positively or negatively, harmoniously, or
disharmoniously, in this field. And realizing that thought may say
unconsciously, or unknowingly, that "I would be quiet in order to
have this or that", then that is still within the field of time.
Bohm: Yes. It is still projecting.
Krishnamurti: It is projecting it to capture it. So from that, how
does this intelligence take place - not how - when does it awaken?
Bohm: Once again the question is in time.
Krishnamurti: That is why I don't want to use the words 'when',
'how'.
Bohm: You can't even ask, are there conditions for it to awaken,
you can only say the condition for it to awaken is the non-operation
of thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: But that is the same as the awakening, it is not merely its
condition. You can't even ask if there are conditions for
intelligence to awaken. Even to talk about a condition is a form of
thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Let us agree, any movement of thought in
any direction, vertical, horizontal, in action or non-action, is still in
time - any movement of thought.
Bohm: Yes.

Krishnamurti: Then what is the relationship of that movement to
this intelligence which is not a movement, which is not of time,
which is not the product of thought, and so on and so on? Where
can the two meet?
Bohm: They don't meet. But there is still some relation.
Krishnamurti: That is what we are trying to find out. Is there
any relationship at all, first? One thinks there is a relationship, one
hopes there is a relationship, one projects a relationship. Is there a
relationship at all?
Bohm: That depends what you mean by relationship?
Krishnamurti: Relationship: being in contact with, recognition,
a feeling of being in touch with.
Bohm: Well, the word relationship might mean something else.
Krishnamurti: What other meaning has it?
Bohm: For example there is a parallel, isn't there? The harmony
of the two. That is, two things may be related without contact, but
by simply being in harmony.
Krishnamurti: Does harmony mean a movement of both in the
same direction?
Bohm: It might also mean in some way keeping in the same
order.
Krishnamurti: In the same order: same order, same direction,
same depth, same intensity - all that is harmony. But can thought
ever be harmonious - thought as movement, not static thought?
Bohm: I understand. There is that thought which you abstract as
static, in geometry let us say, that may have some harmony; but
thought as it actually moves is always contradictory.
Krishnamurti: Therefore it has no harmony in itself. But

intelligence has harmony in itself.
Bohm: I think I see the source of the confusion. We have the
static products of thought that seem to have a certain relative
harmony. But that harmony is really the result of intelligence, at
least it seems so to me. In mathematics we may get a certain
relative harmony of the product of thought, even though the actual
movement of thought of a mathematician is not necessarily in
harmony, generally won't be in harmony. Now that harmony which
appears in mathematics is the result of intelligence, isn't it?
Krishnamurti: Proceed, sir.
Bohm: It is not perfect harmony because every form of
mathematics has been proved to have some limit; that is why I call
it only relative.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: But we want to go further and say that not so much
thought but the action. There is another phase of the question of
time which is the action which we generally do in general, in
which we also seem to need time, chronological time. And that
action at least should be in harmony it seems to me.
Krishnamurti: As we said, sir, thought is movement, in that
movement is there harmony? If there is, then it has relationship
with the other. If there is no harmony and therefore it is
contradiction, change, and all the rest of it, then it has no
relationship with the other.
Bohm: Then would you say that we could do entirely without
thought?
Krishnamurti: I would put it round the other way. Intelligence
uses thought.

Bohm: All right. But how can it use something which is
disharmonious?
Krishnamurti: In the sense, expression, communication, using
thought which is contradictory, which is not harmonious, to create
things in the world.
Bohm: But still, there must be harmony in some other sense, in
what is done with thought, in what we have just described.
Krishnamurti: Let us go slowly in this. Can we first put into
words, negatively or positively, what is intelligence, what is not
intelligence? Or is that impossible because words are thought,
time, measure and all the rest of it?
Bohm: We can't put it in words. We are trying to point. Can we
say that thought can function as the pointer to intelligence, and
then its contradiction doesn't matter.
Krishnamurti: That is right. That is right.
Bohm: Because we are not using it for its content, or its
meaning, but rather as a pointer which points beyond the domain of
time.
Krishnamurti: So thought is a pointer. The content is
intelligence.
Bohm: The content which it points to.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Can we put this thing entirely differently?
May we say, thought is barren?
Bohm: Yes. When it moves by itself, yes.
Krishnamurti: Which is mechanical and all the rest of it.
Thought is a pointer, but without intelligence the pointer has no
value.
Bohm: Could we say that intelligence reads the pointer? If the

pointer has nobody to see it then the pointer doesn't point.
Krishnamurti: Quite. So intelligence is necessary. Without that
this has no meaning at all.
Bohm: But could we now say: that thought without intelligence
points in a very confused way?
Krishnamurti: Yes, confused, in irrelevant ways.
Bohm: Irrelevant, meaningless and so on. Then with
intelligence it begins to point in another way. But then somehow
thought and intelligence seem to fuse in a common function.
Krishnamurti: Yes. So we are asking: what is action in
relationship to intelligence? Right?
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: What is action in relation to intelligence, and in
the carrying out of that action thought is necessary.
Bohm: Yes; well, thought is necessary and this thought points
obviously towards matter. But it seems to point both ways, back
towards intelligence as well. One of the questions which always
comes up is: should we say that intelligence and matter are merely
a distinction of the same thing, or are they different? Are they
really separate? It seems that they ought to be a distinction in the
same thing.
Krishnamurti: I think they are separate, they are distinct.
Bohm: They are distinct, but are they actually separate?
Krishnamurti: What do you mean by that word 'separate'? Not
related, not connected, with no common source?
Bohm: Yes. Do they have a common source?
Krishnamurti: That is just it. Thought, matter and intelligence,
have they a common source? (Long pause.) I think they have,

bound to have.
Bohm: Otherwise there could be no harmony, of course.
Krishnamurti: But you see thought has conquered the world.
You understand, conquered?
Bohm: Dominates the world.
Krishnamurti: Thought, the intellect, dominates the world. And
therefore intelligence has very little place here. When one thing
dominates, the other must be subservient.
Bohm: One asks, I don't know if it is relevant, how that came
about.
Krishnamurti: That is fairly simple.
Bohm: What would you say?
Krishnamurti: I would say thought must have security; it is
seeking security in all its movement.
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: But intelligence is not seeking security. It has no
security. The idea of security doesn't exist in intelligence.
Intelligence itself is secure, not, "It seeks security."
Bohm: Yes, but one could also consider this question, how did
it come about that intelligence allowed itself to be dominated?
Krishnamurti: Oh, that is fairly clear. Pleasure, comfort,
physical security, first of all physical security: security in
relationship, security in action, security...
Bohm: But that is a kind of illusion of security.
Krishnamurti: Illusion of security, of course.
Bohm: You could say that thought got out of hand and ceased to
allow itself to be orderly, ordered in general by intelligence, or at
least it ceased to stay in harmony with intelligence, and began to

move on its own accord.
Krishnamurti: On its own accord.
Bohm: Seeking security and pleasure and so on.
Krishnamurti: As we were saying the other day when we were
talking together, the whole Western world is based on measure;
and the Eastern world tried to go beyond that. But they used
thought to go beyond it.
Bohm: Tried to anyway.
Krishnamurti: Tried to go beyond the measure by exercising
thought; therefore they were caught in thought. Now security,
physical security, is necessary and therefore physical existence,
physical pleasures, physical well-being became tremendously
important.
Bohm: Yes, I was thinking about that a little. If you go back to
the animal, then there is instinctive response towards pleasure and
security would be right. But now when thought comes in, it can
dazzle the instinct and produce all sorts of glamour, more pleasure,
more security. And the instincts are not intelligent enough to deal
with the complexity of thought, therefore thought went wrong,
because it excited the instincts and the instincts demanded more.
Krishnamurti: Quite. So thought really created a world of
illusion, miasma, confusion, and put away intelligence.
Bohm: Well, as we said before, that has made the brain very
chaotic and noisy and intelligence is the silence of the brain;
therefore the noisy brain is not intelligent.
Krishnamurti: The noisy brain is not intelligent, quite right!
Bohm: Well that more or less explains the origin of the thing.
Krishnamurti: We are trying to find out what is the relationship,

in action, of thought and intelligence. Because everything is action
or inaction. And what is the relationship of all that to intelligence?
Thought does produce chaotic action, fragmentary action.
Bohm: When it is not ordered by intelligence.
Krishnamurti: Of course. And it is not ordered by intelligence in
the way we all live.
Bohm: That is because of what we have just said.
Krishnamurti: It is fragmented activity, therefore it is not an
activity of a wholeness. The activity of wholeness is intelligence.
Bohm: Intelligence also has to understand the activity of
thought.
Krishnamurti: Yes, we said that.
Bohm: Now would you say that when intelligence understands
the activity of thought, then thought is different in its operation?
Krishnamurti: Yes, obviously. That is, if thought has created
nationalism as a means of security and when one sees the fallacy of
it, the seeing of the fallacy of it is intelligence. Thought then
creates a different kind of world in which nationalism doesn't exist.
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: And therefore division, conflict, war and all the
rest.
Bohm: That is very clear. Intelligence sees the falseness of what
is going on. Now that falseness stops. When thought is free of this
falseness it is different. Then it begins to be a parallel to
intelligence.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: That is, it begins to carry out the implication of
intelligence.

Krishnamurti: Therefore thought has a place.
Bohm: That is very interesting because you could say thought is
never actually controlled or dominated by intelligence, thought
always moves on its own. But in the light of intelligence, when the
falseness is seen, then thought moves parallel or in harmony with
intelligence.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: But thought never has anything that forces it to do
anything. That would suggest that intelligence and thought have
this common origin or substance, and that they are two ways of
calling attention to a greater whole.
Krishnamurti: Yes. Sir, one can see how politically, religiously,
psychologically, thought has created a world of tremendous
contradiction, fragmentation, and the intelligence that is the
product of this confusion tries to bring order in this confusion, not
the intelligence which sees the falseness of all this. I don't know if I
am making myself clear. You see, I can be terribly intelligent
although I am chaotic.
Bohm: Well, in some ways.
Krishnamurti: That is what is happening in the world.
Bohm: But I suppose it is rather hard to understand that at this
moment. You could say that in some limited sphere it seems that
intelligence is able to operate, but outside it doesn't.
Krishnamurti: We are, after all, concerned with living, not with
theories, not theories of insight and so on. But one is concerned
with a life in which intelligence operates. Intelligence which is not
of time, which is not of measure, which is not the product or the
movement of thought, or of the order of thought. Now a human

being wants to live a different kind of life. He is dominated by
thought, his thought is always functioning in measurement, in
comparison, in conflict. He asks, "How am I to be free of all this in
order to be intelligent?" "How can the 'me', how can 'I' be the
instrument of this intelligence?"
Bohm: Obviously it can't be.
Krishnamurti: That is just it!
Bohm: Because this thought in time is the essence of
unintelligence.
Krishnamurti: But one is thinking in terms of that all the time.
Bohm: Yes. That is thought projecting some sort of phantasy of
what intelligence is, and trying to achieve it.
Krishnamurti: Therefore I would say that thought must be
completely still for the awakening of that. There can't be a
movement of thought and yet the awakening of that.
Bohm: That is clear on one level. We consider thought to be
actually mechanical and this may be seen on one level, but still the
mechanism continues.
Krishnamurti: Continues, yes...
Bohm: ...through instincts and pleasure and fear and so on. The
intelligence therefore has to come to grips with this question of the
pleasures, the fears, the desires, which make thought continue.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: And you see there is always this trap, which is to form a
concept or image of it, which is partial.
Krishnamurti: Of course. So as a human being I would be
concerned only with this. I know how confused, contradictory,
disharmonious one's life is. Is it possible to change that so that

intelligence can function in my life, so that I live without
disharmony, so that the pointer, the direction is guided by
intelligence? You see, sir, that is why the religious people, instead
of using the word intelligence, have used the word god.
Bohm: What is the advantage of that?
Krishnamurti: I don't know what the advantage is.
Bohm: But why use such a word?
Krishnamurti: Because it came from primitive fear, fear of
thunder, fear of nature, and gradually out of that grew the idea that
there is a super-father.
Bohm: But that is still the brain functioning.
Krishnamurti: Of course. I am just saying that. They said trust
god, have faith in god, then god will operate through you.
Bohm: It is a sort of metaphor, if you said, god is intelligence.
But most people didn't take it as a metaphor.
Krishnamurti: Of course not, that's a terrific image.
Bohm: Yes. You could say that if god means that which is
immeasurable, beyond thought...
Krishnamurti: ...it is unnameable, it is immeasurable, therefore
don't have an image.
Bohm: Then that will operate within the measurable.
Krishnamurti: Yes. What I am trying to convey is, that the
desire for this intelligence, through time, has created this image of
god. And through the image of god, Jesus, Krishna, or whatever it
is, by having faith in that - which is still the movement of thought I hope that way there will be harmony in my life.
Bohm: And this sort of image because it is so total produces an
overriding desire, urge; that is, it overrides rationality.

Krishnamurti: It overrides rationality, everything.
Bohm: Everything.
Krishnamurti: You heard the other day what the archbishops
and bishops were saying - it sounded so ridiculous - that only Jesus
matters, nothing else matters.
Bohm: But it is the same movement whereby pleasure overrides
rationality.
Krishnamurti: Of course, of course. Fear and pleasure.
Bohm: They override; no proportion can be established.
Krishnamurti: Yes, what I am trying to say is: you see the whole
world is conditioned this way.
Bohm: Yes, but the question is what you have hinted at: what is
this world which is conditioned this way? If we take this world as
objectively existent, then we have fallen into the same trap.
Krishnamurti: Of course, of course.
Bohm: That is, the whole world is the result of this way of
thinking, it is both the cause and the effect of this way of thinking.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: And this way of thinking is disharmony and chaos and
unintelligence and so on.
Krishnamurti: I was listening to the Labour Party Conference at
Blackpool. It was very interesting, how clever, some of them very,
very serious, double talk and all that, they are thinking in terms of
Labour party and Conservative Party. They don't say, "Look, let all
of us get together and see what is the best thing, the most
marvellous thing for human beings."
Bohm: They are not capable.
Krishnamurti: That is just it, but they are exercising their

intelligence!
Bohm: Well, in that limited framework. That is what our trouble
has always been; people have developed technology and weapons
and other things in terms of some limited intelligence, which is
serving highly unintelligent purposes.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that is just it.
Bohm: For thousands of years that has been going on. Then of
course I think reaction tends to arise like this, that is all much too
big.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: In other words it is a vast thing, over time and space.
Krishnamurti: But it is really very simple, extraordinarily
simple, this sense of harmony. Because it is so simple it can
function in the most complex field.
Let us go back. We said the source is common to both thought
and intelligence.
Bohm: Yes, we got that far.
Krishnamurti: What is that source?
Bohm: Well that would be beyond me.
Krishnamurti: Wait a minute, sir. Let's see. What is that source?
They generally attribute it to some philosophical concept, or they
say that source is god - I am just using that word for the moment or Jehovha or Brahman. That source is common, is the central
movement which divides itself into matter and intelligence. But
that is just a verbal statement, it is just an idea, which is still
thought. Therefore you can't find it through thought.
Bohm: That raises the question: if you find it then what are
'you'?

Krishnamurti: 'You' don't exist. 'You' can't exist when you are
asking what is the source. 'You' are time, movement,
environmental conditioning - you are all that.
Bohm: In that question the whole of this division is put aside.
Krishnamurti: Absolutely. That is the point, isn't it?
Bohm: There is no time.
Krishnamurti: Yet we still say, "I am not going to exercise
thought." When the 'me' enters there is division: so deliberately
understanding the whole of this, what we have been talking about,
I put away the 'me' altogether.
Bohm: But that sounds like a contradiction.
Krishnamurti: I know. I can't put it away. It takes place. Then
what is the source? Can it ever be named? For instance the Jewish
religious feeling is that it is not nameable: you don't name it, you
can't talk about it, you can't touch it. You can only look. And the
Hindus and others say the same thing in different words. The
Christians have tripped themselves up over this word Jesus, this
image, they have never gone to the source of it.
Bohm: That is a complex question because it might be that they
were trying to synthesize several philosophies.
Krishnamurti: Yes, of course. Because after all Christianity
came out of Judea.
Bohm: And Greece and Asia.
Krishnamurti: Of course. The other day a whole group of Arabs
on television were marching, I forget where; another group, later
on, from Israel was marching. I said, look, only the headdress - you
follow, sir. Their Arabic, which is the outcome of Hebrew, and
they have divided up. It is so appalling.

Bohm: Yes, I mean if you watch the people on television in
Lebanon, you could easily say they were just like Jews.
Krishnamurti: After all they are all the semitic type, and all the
rest of it. There it is. We see this. Now I want to get at this: what is
the source? Can thought find it? And thought is born from that
source; and intelligence is also born from that source. It is like two
streams moving in different directions.
Bohm: Would you say matter is also born from that source more
generally?
Krishnamurti: Of course.
Bohm: I mean the whole universe. But then the source is
beyond the universe.
Krishnamurti: Of course. It must be, otherwise... Now what is
that? Could we put it this way? Thought is energy, so is
intelligence.
Bohm: So is matter.
Krishnamurti: Thought, matter, the mechanical, is energy.
Intelligence is also energy. Thought is confused, polluted, dividing
itself, fragmenting itself.
Bohm: Yes, it is multiple.
Krishnamurti: And this is not. This is not polluted. It cannot
divide itself as 'my intelligence' and 'your intelligence'. It is
intelligence, it is not divisible. Now it has sprung from a source of
energy which has divided itself.
Bohm: Why has it divided itself?
Krishnamurti: Because for physical reasons, for comfort, for
existence, you know all the rest of it.
Bohm: To maintain physical existence. So a part of intelligence

has been changed in such a way as to help to maintain physical
existence.
Krishnamurti: Yes.
Bohm: It has developed in a certain way.
Krishnamurti: And gone on in that way. Both are energy. So
there is only one energy.
Bohm: Yes, they are different forms of energy. There are many
analogies to this, although it is on a much more limited scale. In
physics you could say light is ordinarily a very complex wave
motion, infinitely complex, but in the laser it can be made to move
all together in a very simple and harmonious way.
Krishnamurti: Yes. I was reading about the laser. What
monstrous things they are going to produce with this.
Bohm: Yes, using it destructively. Thought may get something
good but then it always gets used in a broader way that is
destructive.
Krishnamurti: So there is only energy, which is the source.
Bohm: Would you say energy is a kind of movement?
Krishnamurti: No, it is energy. The moment it is a movement it
goes off into this field of thought.
Bohm: We have to clarify this notion of energy. I have also
looked up this word. You see, it is based on the notion of work;
energy means, "To work within."
Krishnamurti: Work within, yes.
Bohm: But now you say there is an energy which works, but no
movement.
Krishnamurti: Yes. I was thinking about this yesterday - not
thinking - I realized the source is there, uncontaminated, non-

movement, untouched by thought, it is there. From that these two
are born. Why are they born at all?
Bohm: One was necessary for survival.
Krishnamurti: That is all. In survival this has been denied, or
put aside in its totality, in its wholeness. What I am trying to get at
is this, sir. I want to find out, as a human being living in this world
with all the chaos and suffering, and all the rest of it, can the
human mind touch that source in which the two divisions don't
exist? And because it has touched this source, because it has no
division, it can operate without the sense of division. I don't know
if I am conveying this?
Bohm: But how is it possible for the human mind not to touch
the source? Why does it not touch the source?
Krishnamurti: Because we are consumed by thought, by the
cleverness of thought, by the movement of thought. All their gods,
their meditations, everything is that.
Bohm: Yes. I think this brings us to the question of life and
death, because that is one of the things that gets in the way. This is
also related to survival.
Krishnamurti: Because of thought and its field of security, its
desire for security, it has created death as something separate from
itself.
Bohm: Yes, that may be the key point.
Krishnamurti: It is. That is what we were talking about
yesterday morning to the students.
Bohm: You can look at it this way. Thought has constructed
itself as an instrument for survival, not to die. Now therefore...
Krishnamurti: What it has done, it has created immortality in

Jesus, or in this or that.
Bohm: Thought cannot possibly contemplate its own death. So
if it tries to do so, it always projects something else, some other
broader point of view from which it seems to look at it. If anybody
tries to imagine that he is dead, then he is still imagining that he is
alive and looking at himself as dead. You can always complicate
this in all sorts of theories and religion and so on; but it seems to be
built into thought that it cannot possibly consider death properly.
Krishnamurti: It cannot. It means ending itself.
Bohm: That is very interesting. Suppose we take the death of
the body, which we see outwardly; the organism dies, it loses its
energy and therefore it falls apart.
Krishnamurti: It is really that the body is the instrument of the
energy.
Bohm: So let us say the energy ceases to imbue the body and
therefore the body no longer has any wholeness. You could say
that with thought also; the energy in some ways goes to thought, as
to the body. Would that make sense?
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: You and other people have often used the phrase: "The
mind dies to the whole of thought." That way of putting it is
puzzling at first, because you would think it was thought that
should die.
Krishnamurti: Quite, quite.
Bohm: But now you are saying that it is the mind that dies, or
the energy that dies to thought. The nearest I can see to what that
means is, that when thought is working it is invested with a certain
energy by the mind or the intelligence; and when thought is no

longer relevant, then the energy goes and thought is like a dead
organism.
Krishnamurti: That is right.
Bohm: Now it is very hard for the mind to accept this, because
the comparison between thought and the organism seems so poor,
because thought is insubstantial and the organism is substantial. So
the death of the organism seems something far more than the death
of thought. Now this is a point that is not clear. Would you say that
in the death of thought we have the essence of the death of the
organism as well?
Krishnamurti: Obviously.
Bohm: Although it is on a small scale, as it were, it is of the
same nature?
Krishnamurti: Yes. You see, sir, wait a minute. As we said,
there is energy in both, and thought in its movement has created
this energy, is this energy, and thought cannot see itself die.
Bohm: It has no way of imagining, or projecting, or conceiving
its own death.
Krishnamurti: Therefore it escapes from death.
Bohm: Well, it gives itself the illusion.
Krishnamurti: Illusion of course. And it has created the illusion
of immortality or a state beyond death, a projection of its own
desire for its own continuity.
Bohm: Well, that is one thing, that thought may have begun by
desiring the continuity of the organism.
Krishnamurti: Yes, that is right, and then gone on beyond it.
Bohm: Gone beyond that, to desire its own continuity. That was
the mistake, that was where it went wrong.

Krishnamurti: Yes, went wrong. It saw the organism as itself.
Bohm: It felt itself to be an extension, not merely an extension,
but the essence of the organism. At first thought is functioning
merely in the organism and then thought begins to present itself as
the essence of the organism.
Krishnamurti: That's right.
Bohm: Then thought begins to desire its own immortality.
Krishnamurti: And thought itself knows, is very well aware that
it is not immortal.
Bohm: It knows it only outwardly, though. I mean, it knows it
as an outward fact.
Krishnamurti: Therefore it creates immortality in pictures,
images.
I listen to all this as an outsider and I say to myself, "This is
perfectly true, so clear, logical, sane; we see it very clearly, both
psychologically and physically." Now my next question, observing
all this, is: can the mind keep the purity of the original source? The
original pristine clarity of that energy which is not touched by the
corruption of thought, by thought at all? I don't know if I am
conveying it?
Bohm: The question is clear.
Krishnamurti: Can the mind do it? Can the mind ever discover
that?
Bohm: What is the mind?
Krishnamurti: The mind we now say is organism, thought, the
brain with all its memories, experiences and all that, which is all of
time. And the mind says, "Can I come to this?" It cannot. Then I
say to myself, "As it cannot, I will be quiet." You see the tricks it

has played.
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: I will learn how to be quiet; I will learn how to
meditate in order to be quiet. I see the importance of having a mind
that is free of time, free of the mechanism of thought, I will control
it, subjugate it, put away thought. But it is still the operation of
thought. That is very clear. Then what is it to do? Because a human
being who just lives in this disharmony, he must enquire into this.
And that is what we are doing. As we begin to enquire into it, or in
enquiring, we come to this source. Is it a perception, an insight, and
has that insight nothing whatsoever to do with thought? Is insight
the result of thought? The conclusion of an insight is thought, but
insight itself is not thought. So I have got a key to it. Then what is
insight? Can I invite it, cultivate it?
Bohm: You can't do any of that. But there is a kind of energy
that is needed.
Krishnamurti: That is just it. I can't do anything. When I
cultivate it, it is desire. When I say I will do this or that, it is the
same. So insight is not the product of thought. It is not in the order
of thought. Now, how does one come upon this insight? (Pause)
We have come upon it because we denied all that.
Bohm: Yes, it is there. You can never answer that question, how
you come upon anything.
Krishnamurti: No. I think it is fairly clear, sir. You do come
upon it when you see the whole thing. So insight is the perception
of the whole. A fragment cannot see this, but the 'I' that sees the
fragments and the 'I' seeing the fragments sees the whole, and the
quality of a mind that sees the whole is not touched by thought;

therefore there is perception, there is insight.
Bohm: Perhaps we will go over that more slowly. We see all the
fragments: could we say the actual energy, activity, which sees
those fragments is whole?
Krishnamurti: Yes, yes.
Bohm: We don't manage ever to see the whole because...
Krishnamurti: ...we are educated, and all the rest of it.
Bohm: But I mean, we wouldn't anyway see the whole as
something. But rather, the wholeness is the freedom in seeing all
the fragments.
Krishnamurti: That is right. Freedom to see. The freedom
doesn't exist when there are fragments.
Bohm: That makes a paradox.
Krishnamurti: Of course.
Bohm: But the whole does not start from the fragments. Once
the whole operates then there are no fragments. So the paradox
comes from supposing that the fragments are independently real,
that they exist independently of thought. Then you would say, if I
suppose that the fragments are there independently of me and my
thought, and then I must somehow do something about them - that
would be a paradox. The whole starts from the insight that these
fragments are in a way nothing. That is the way it seems to me.
They are not substantial realities. They are very insubstantial.
Krishnamurti: Insubstantial, yes.
Bohm: And therefore they don't prevent wholeness.
Krishnamurti: Quite.
Bohm: You see, one of the things that often causes confusion is
that, when you put it in terms of thought, it seems that you are

presented with the fragments that are real, substantial reality. Then
you have to see them, and then you say, as long as the fragments
are there, there is no wholeness so that you can't see them. But that
all comes back to the one thing, the one source.
Krishnamurti: I am sure, sir, really serious people have asked
this question. They have asked it and tried to find an answer
through thought.
Bohm: Yes, well it seems natural.
Krishnamurti: And they never saw that they were caught in
thought.
Bohm: That is always the trouble. Everybody gets into this
trouble: that he seems to be looking at everything, at his problems,
saying, "Those are my problems, I am looking." But that looking is
only thinking, but it is confused with looking. One of the
confusions that arises is that if you say, don't think but look, that
person feels he is already looking.
Krishnamurti: Quite. So you see, this question has arisen and
they say, "All right, then I must control thought, I must subjugate
thought and I must make my mind quiet so that it becomes whole,
then I can see the parts, all the fragments, then I'll touch the
source." But it is still the operation of thought all the time.
Bohm: Yes, that means the operation of thought is unconscious
for the most part and therefore one doesn't know it is going on. We
may say consciously we have realized that all this has to be
changed, it has to be different.
Krishnamurti: But the unconscious is still going on. Can you
talk to my unconscious, knowing my conscious brain is going to
resist you? Because you are telling me something which is

revolutionary, you are telling me something which shatters my
whole house which I have built so carefully, and I won't listen to
you. You follow? In my instinctive reactions I push you away. So
you realize that and say, "Look, all right, old friend, just don't
bother to listen to me that way. I am going to talk to your
unconscious. I am going to talk to your unconscious and make that
unconscious see that whatever movement it does is still within the
field of time and so on." So your conscious mind is never in
operation. When it operates it must inevitably either resist, or say,
"I will accept", therefore it creates a conflict in itself, and all the
rest of it. So can you talk to my unconscious?
Bohm: You can always ask how.
Krishnamurti: No, no. You tell me first, "Look, old boy, don't
resist, think about, look at that tree, but I am going to talk to you."
It sounds funny, but you know what I mean. I am going to talk to
you. We two are communicating with each other without the
conscious mind listening.
Bohm: Yes.
Krishnamurti: I think this is what really takes place. When you
were talking to me - I was noticing it - I was not listening to your
words so much. I was listening to you. I was open to you, not to
your words, as you explained, I have looked in the dictionaries and
all the rest of it. I said to myself, all right, leave all that, I am
listening to you, not to the words which you use, but to the
meaning, to the inward quality of your feeling which wants to tell
me something.
Bohm: I understand.
Krishnamurti: That changes me, not all this verbalization. So

can you talk to me about my idiocies, my illusions, my peculiar
tendencies, without the conscious mind interfering and saying,
'Please don't touch all this, leave me alone!' They have tried
subliminal propaganda in advertising, quickly, so that whilst you
don't really pay attention, your unconscious does, so you buy that
particular soap! We are not doing that, it would be deadly. You are
telling me, look at the tree, and the cloud, or that picture on that
wall, forget, don't listen to me with your conscious ears but listen
to me with the ears that hear much deeper. That is how I listened to
you this morning because I am terribly interested in the source, as
you are. You follow, sir? And I say, by Jove, we will come to that,
I caught on to it, we will come to that, and I am really interested in
that one thing. All this is the explicable, easily understood - but to
come to that thing together, feel it together! You follow? I think
that is the way to break a conditioning, a habit, an image which I
have cultivated. You talk to me about it at a level where the
conscious mind is not totally interested. It sounds silly, but you
understand what I am saying, sir?
Say for instance I have a conditioning; you can point it out a
dozen times, argue, see the fallacy of it, the stupidity. I still go on. I
resist it, I say what it should be, what shall I do in this world
otherwise, and all the rest of it. But you see the truth that as long as
the mind is conditioned there must be conflict and all the rest of it.
So you penetrate or push aside my resistance and get to that, get
the unconscious to listen to you, because the unconscious is much
more subtle, much quicker. It may be frightened, but it sees the
danger of fear much quicker than the conscious mind does. As
when I was walking in California high in the mountains: I was

looking at birds and trees and watching, and I heard a rattler and I
jumped. It was the unconscious that made the body jump; I saw the
rattler when I jumped, it was two or three feet away, it could have
struck me very easily. If the conscious brain had been operating it
would have taken several seconds.
Bohm: To reach the unconscious you have to have an action
which doesn't directly appeal to the conscious.
Krishnamurti: Yes. That is affection, that is love. When you talk
to my waking consciousness, it is hard, clever, subtle, brittle. And
you penetrate that, say, all right, keep your own beastly little stuff,
and you penetrate it with your look, with your affection, with all
the feeling you have. That operates, not anything else.

